<?xml version="1.0" encoding="iso-8859-1" ?>
<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd">

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
 <fileDesc>
 <titleStmt>
 <title>Johann Sebastian Bach
</title>
 <author>Johann Nikolaus Forkel and Charles Sanford Terry</author>
 </titleStmt>
 <editionStmt>
  <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
 </editionStmt>
 <publicationStmt>
 <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
 <date value="2011-01-24">January 24, 2011</date>
 <idno type="etext-no">35041</idno>
 <availability>
 <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
 with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
 away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
 License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
 </availability>
 </publicationStmt>

 <sourceDesc>
  <bibl>
  <title>Johann Sebastian Bach</title>
  <author>Johann Nikolaus Forkel and Charles Sanford Terry</author>
  <imprint>
   <pubPlace>New York</pubPlace>
   <publisher>Harcourt, Brace and Howe</publisher>
   <date>1920</date>
  </imprint>
  </bibl>
 </sourceDesc>
 </fileDesc>

 <encodingDesc>
 <classDecl>
  <taxonomy id="lc">
  <bibl>
   <title>Library of Congress Classification</title>
  </bibl>
  </taxonomy>
 </classDecl>
 </encodingDesc>
 <profileDesc>
 <langUsage>
  <language id="en"></language>
  <language id="la"></language>
  <language id="de"></language>
  <language id="fr"></language>
  <language id="it"></language>
 </langUsage>
<textClass>
  <classCode scheme="lc">PR</classCode>
<keywords>
<list>
<item>Johann Sebastian Bach, 1685-1750</item>
</list>
</keywords>
</textClass>
 
 </profileDesc>
 <revisionDesc>
 <change>
  <date value="2011-01-24">January 24, 2011</date>
  <respStmt>
  <name>Martin Schub<lb /></name>
  </respStmt>
  <item>Project Gutenberg Edition</item>
 </change>
 </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }

    figure           { text-align: center; page-float: 'p' }
    .floatleft       { float: left;  margin-right: 2em }
    .floatright      { float: right; margin-left:  2em }
    .w90             { }
    .w80             { }
    .w70             { }
    .w50             { }
    .w40             { }
    .w30             { }
    .w20             { }
    .w05             { }
    @media pdf {
      .w90             { width: 90% }
      .w80             { width: 80% }
      .w70             { width: 70% }
      .w50             { width: 50% }
      .w40             { width: 40% }
      .w30             { width: 30% }
      .w20             { width: 20% }
      .w05             { width: 5% }
    }
  </pgStyleSheet>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">

<front>

<div>
<divGen type="pgheader" />
</div>
<div>
  <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<figure url="images/frontisp.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head><emph>Johann Sebastian Bach.  About 1720. (From the picture by Johann Jakob Ihle, in the Bach Museum, Eisenach).</emph></head>
<figDesc>Johann Sebastian Bach</figDesc>
</figure>
<p></p>
</div>

<titlePage rend="page-break-before: right">
 <docTitle><titlePart type="main" rend="font-size: x-large">Johann Sebastian Bach</titlePart><lb /><lb/>
</docTitle>
<titlePart type="sub">His Life, Art and Work.  Translated from the German of Johann Nikolaus Forkel.  With notes and appendices by Charles Sanford Terry, Litt.D. Cantab.</titlePart>

 <byline><lb /><lb /><lb /><docAuthor>Johann Nikolaus Forkel and Charles Sanford Terry</docAuthor><lb /><lb /><lb /><lb /></byline>

<docImprint>Harcourt, Brace and Howe, New York</docImprint><lb />
<docDate>1920</docDate>
</titlePage>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Contents</head>
<divGen type="toc" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<head>Illustrations</head>
<divGen type="fig" />
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>Introduction</head>
<pb n="ix" />

<p>
Johann Nikolaus Forkel, author of the monograph 
of which the following pages afford a translation, 
was born at Meeder, a small village in Saxe-Coburg, on February 22, 1749, seventeen months 
before the death of Johann Sebastian Bach, whose 
first biographer he became.  Presumably he would 
have followed the craft of his father, the village 
shoemaker, had not an insatiable love of music 
seized him in early years.  He obtained books, 
and studied them with the village schoolmaster. 
In particular he profited by the <q>Vollkommener
Kapellmeister</q> of Johann Mattheson, of Hamburg, 
the sometime friend of Handel.  Like Handel, 
he found a derelict Clavier in the attic of his home 
and acquired proficiency upon it.  
Forkel's professional career, like Bach's half a 
century earlier, began at L&uuml;neburg, where, at the 
age of thirteen (1762), he was admitted to the choir 
of the parish church.  Thence, at the age of 
seventeen (1766), he proceeded to Schwerin as <q>Chorpr&auml;fect,</q> and enjoyed the favour of the 
Grand Duke.  Three years later he betook himself (1769), at the age of twenty, to the University
<pb n="x" />
of G&ouml;ttingen, which he entered as a law student, 
though a slender purse compelled him to give 
music lessons for a livelihood.  He used his opportunity 
to acquire a knowledge of modern languages, 
which stood him in good stead later, when his 
researches required him to explore foreign literatures.  
Concurrently he pursued his musical activities, 
and in 1774 published at G&ouml;ttingen his first 
work, <title>Ueber die Theorie der Musik,</title> advocating 
the foundation of a music lectureship in the University.  
Four years later (1778) he was appointed 
its Director of Music, and from 1779 to 1815 conducted 
the weekly concerts of the Sing-Akademie.  
In 1780 he received from the University the 
doctorate of philosophy.  The rest of his life was 
spent at G&ouml;ttingen, where he died on March 17, 
1818, having just completed his sixty-ninth 
year.
</p>
<p>
That Forkel is remembered at all is due solely 
to his monograph on Bach.  Written at a time 
when Bach's greatness was realised in hardly any 
quarter, the book claimed for him pre-eminence 
which a tardily enlightened world since has conceded 
him.  By his generation Forkel was esteemed 
chiefly for his literary activity, critical ability, and 
merit as a composer.  His principal work, <title>Allgemeine Geschichte der Musik,</title> was published in 
two volumes at Leipzig in 1788 and 1801.  Carl 
Friedrich Zelter, Goethe's friend and correspondent, 
dismissed the book contemptuously as that of
<pb n="xi" />
an author who had <q>set out to write a history of 
music, but came to an end just where the history 
of music begins.</q>  Forkel's work, in fact, breaks 
off at the sixteenth century. But the curtailed <title>
History</title> cleared the way for the monograph on 
Bach, a more valuable contribution to the literature 
of music.  Forkel already had published, in 
three volumes, at Gotha in 1778, his <title>Musikalisch-kritische Bibliothek,</title> and in 1792 completed his 
critical studies by publishing at Leipzig his <title>Allgemeine Literatur der Musik.</title>
</p>
<p>
Forkel was also a student of the music of the 
polyphonic school.  He prepared for the press the 
scores of a number of sixteenth century Masses, 
Motets, etc., and fortunately received proofs of 
them from the engraver.  For, in 1806, after the 
Battle of Jena, the French impounded the plates 
and melted them down.  Forkel's proofs are still 
preserved in the Berlin Royal Library.  He was 
diligent in quest of Bach's scattered MSS., and his 
friendship with Bach's elder sons, Carl Philipp 
Emmanuel and Wilhelm Friedemann, enabled him 
to secure precious relics which otherwise might 
have shared the fate of too many of Bach's manuscripts.  
He took an active interest in the proposal 
of Messrs. Hoffmeister and K&uuml;hnel, predecessors of C. F. 
Peters at Leipzig, to print a <q>kritisch-korrecte</q> edition of Bach's Organ and Clavier 
works.  Through his friend, Johann Gottfried 
Schicht, afterwards Cantor at St. Thomas's,
<pb n="xii" />
Leipzig, he was also associated with Breitkopf and 
Haertel's publication of five of Bach's six extant 
Motets in 1802-3.
</p>
<p>
As a composer Forkel has long ceased to be 
remembered.  His works include two Oratorios, <title>
Hiskias</title> (1789) and <title>Die Hirten bey der Krippe</title>; 
four Cantatas for chorus and orchestra; Clavier 
Concertos, and many Sonatas and Variations for 
the Harpsichord.
</p>
<p>
In 1802, for reasons which he explains in his 
Preface, Forkel published from Hoffmeister and 
K&uuml;hnel's <q>Bureau de Musique</q> his <title>Ueber Johann 
Sebastian Bachs Leben, Kunst und Kunstwerke.  
F&uuml;r patriotische Verehrer echter musikalischer 
Kunst,</title> of which a new edition was issued by 
Peters in 1856.  The original edition bears a dedication 
to Gottfried Baron van Swieten<note place="foot">
<p>
<q>Seiner Excellenz dem Freyheren 
van Swieten ehrerbietigst 
gewidmet von dem Verfasser.</q>
</p>
</note>
 (1734-1803), Prefect of the Royal Library, Vienna, and 
sometime Austrian Ambassador in Berlin, a friend 
of Haydn and Mozart, patron of Beethoven, a 
man whose age allowed him to have seen Bach, 
and whose career makes the association with Bach 
that Forkel's dedication gives him not undeserved.  
It was he, an ardent Bach enthusiast, who introduced 
the youthful Mozart to the music of the 
Leipzig Cantor. <q>I go every Sunday at twelve 
o'clock to the Baron van Swieten,</q> Mozart writes 
in 1782, <q>where nothing is played but Handel and 
<pb n="xiii" />
Bach, and I am now making a collection of the 
Fugues of Bach.</q>  The merit and limitations of 
Forkel's book will be considered later.  For the 
moment the fact deserves emphasis that, inadequate 
as it is, it presented a fuller picture of Bach 
than so far had been drawn, and was the first to 
render the homage due to his genius.
</p>
<p>
In an illuminating chapter (xii.), <title>Death and 
Resurrection</title>, Schweitzer has told the story of 
the neglect that obscured Bach's memory after 
his death in 1750.  Isolated voices, raised here 
and there, acclaimed his genius.  With Bach's 
treatise on <title>The Art of Fugue</title> before him, Johann 
Mattheson (1681-1664), the foremost critic of the 
day, claimed that Germany was <q>the true home 
of Organ music and Fugue.</q>  Friedrich Wilhelm 
Marpurg (1718-95), the famous Berlin theorist, 
expressed the same opinion in his preface to the 
edition of that work published shortly after Bach's 
death.  But such appreciations were rare.  Little 
of Bach's music was in print and available for 
performance or critical judgment.  Even at St.
Thomas's, Leipzig, it suffered almost complete 
neglect until a generation after Forkel's death.  
The bulk of Bach's MSS. was divided among his 
family, and Forkel himself, with unrivalled opportunity 
to acquaint himself with the dimensions 
of Bach's industry, knew little of his 
music except the Organ and Clavier compositions.
</p>
<pb n="xiv" />
<p>
In these circumstances it is not strange that 
Bach's memory waited for more than half a 
century for a biographer.  Forkel, however, was 
not the first to assemble the known facts of 
Bach's career or to assert his place in the music of 
Germany.
</p>
<p>
Putting aside Johann Gottfried Walther's brief 
epitome in his <title>Lexikon</title> (1732), the first and most 
important of the early notices of Bach was the 
obituary article, or <q>Nekrolog,</q> contributed by his 
son, Carl Philipp Emmanuel, and Johann Friedrich 
Agricola, one of Bach's most distinguished pupils, 
to the fourth volume of Mizler's <title>Musikalische 
Bibliothek,</title> published at Leipzig in 1754.  The 
authors of this appreciation give it an intimacy 
which renders it precious.  But Mizler's periodical 
was the organ of a small Society, of which Bach 
had been a member, and outside its associates 
can have done little to extend a knowledge of the 
subject of the memoir.
</p>
<p>
Johann Friedrich Agricola contributed notes 
on Bach to Jakob Adlung's <title>Musica mechanica 
Organoedi,</title> published in two volumes at Berlin in 
1768.  The article is valuable chiefly for Agricola's 
exposition of Bach's opinions upon Organ and 
Clavier building.
</p>
<p>
With the intention to represent him as <q>the 
coryphaeus of all organists,</q> Johann Adam Hiller, 
who a few years later became Cantor at St.
Thomas's, Leipzig, published there in 1784 a
<pb n="xv" />
brief account of Bach in his <title>Lebensbeschreibungen ber&uuml;hmter Musikgelehrten und Tonk&uuml;nstler neuerer Zeit.</title>
</p>
<p>
Four years after Hiller's notice, Ernst Ludwig 
Gerber published at Leipzig, in two volumes, 
1790-92, his <title>Historisch-biographische Lexikon 
der Tonk&uuml;nstler.</title>  As in Hiller's case, Gerber, 
whose father had been Bach's pupil, was chiefly 
interested in Bach as an organist.
</p>
<p>
Coincidently with Gerber, another of Bach's 
pupils, Johann Martin Schubart, who succeeded 
him at Weimar in 1717, sketched his characteristics 
as a performer in the <title>Aesthetik der Tonkunst</title>, 
published at Berlin by his son in the <title>Deutschen 
Monatsschrift</title> in 1793. 
</p>
<p>
In 1794 appeared at Leipzig the first volume of a 
work which Spitta characterises as fantastic and 
unreliable, so far as it deals with Bach, Friedrich 
Carl Gottlieb Hirsching's <title>Historisch-literarisches 
Handbuch</title> of notable persons deceased in the 
eighteenth century.
</p>
<p>
Last of Forkel's forerunners, A. E. L. Siebigke 
published at Breslau in 1801 his <title>Museum 
deutscher Tonk&uuml;nstler,</title> a work which adds 
nothing to our knowledge of Bach's life, but 
offers some remarks on his style.
</p>
<p>
Little, if any, information of value, therefore, 
had been added to the <title>Nekrolog</title> of 1754 when 
Forkel, in 1802, produced his monograph on Bach 
and his music.  Nor, viewed as a biography, does
<pb n="xvi" />
Forkel much enlarge our knowledge of the conditions 
of Bach's life.  He had the advantage of 
knowing Bach's elder sons, but appears to have 
lacked curiosity regarding the circumstances of 
Bach's career, and to have made no endeavour to 
add to his imperfect information, even regarding 
his hero's life at Leipzig, upon which it should have 
been easy for him to obtain details of utmost 
interest.  His monograph, in fact, is not a <q>Life</q>
in the biographic sense, but a critical appreciation 
of Bach as player, teacher, and composer, based 
upon the Organ and Clavier works, with which 
alone Forkel was familiar.
</p>
<p>
It would be little profitable to weigh the value 
of Forkel's criticism.  We are tempted to the conclusion 
that Bach appealed to him chiefly as a 
supreme master of technique, and our hearts would 
open to him more widely did not his appreciation 
of Bach march with a narrow depreciation 
of Haydn, Mozart, and Beethoven, the last of 
whom, he declared <foreign lang="la">ex cathedra</foreign>, had not produced <q>a single work which can be called a masterpiece.</q>
Gluck he frankly detested.
</p>
<p>
But Forkel's monograph is notable on other 
grounds.  It was the first to claim for Bach a 
place among the divinities.  It used him to 
stimulate a national sense in his own people.  
Bach's is the first great voice from out of Germany 
since Luther.  Of Germany's own Kisorgimento, 
patently initiated by Goethe a generation after
<pb n="xvii" />
Johann Sebastian's death, Bach himself is the 
harbinger.  In his assertion of a distinctive German 
musical art he set an example followed in 
turn by Mozart, Weber, and Wagner.  <q>With 
Bach,</q> wrote Wagner, <q>the German Spirit was born 
anew.</q>  It is Forkel's perpetual distinction that 
he grasped a fact hidden from almost all but 
himself.  In his Preface, and more emphatically 
in the closing paragraph of his last Chapter, he 
presents Bach as the herald of a German nation 
yet unformed.
</p>
<p>
It is a farther distinction of Forkel's monograph 
that it made converts.  With its publication the 
clouds of neglect that too long had obscured Bach's 
grandeur began to melt away, until the dizzy 
altitude of his genius stood revealed.  The publication 
of the five Motets (1803) was followed by 
that of the Magnificat in 1811, and of the Mass 
in A in 1818.  A beginning was made with the 
Cantatas in 1821, when Breitkopf and Haertel 
published <q>Ein' feste Burg</q> (No. 80), commended 
in an article written (1822) by Johann Friedrich Rochlitz (1769-1842), the champion of Beethoven, 
as now of Bach.  Another enthusiastic 
pioneer was Carl Friedrich Zelter (1758-1832), 
conductor of the Berlin Sing-Akademie, who 
called Bach <q>a sign of God, clear, yet inexplicable.</q>   
To him in large measure was due the memorable 
revival of the <title>St. Matthew Passion</title> at Berlin, 
which the youthful Mendelssohn, Zelter's pupil,
<pb n="xviii" />
conducted in March 1829, exactly one hundred 
years after the first production of the mighty work 
at Leipzig.  In the following years it was given 
at Dresden and many other German towns.  
Leipzig heard it again after a barren interval in 
1841, and did tardy homage to its incomparable 
composer by erecting (1843) the statue that 
stands in the shadow of St. Thomas's Church, 
hard by the Cantor's home for a quarter of a 
century.
</p>
<p>
Meanwhile, in 1830 and 1831 the <title>St. Matthew 
Passion</title> and <title>St. John Passion</title> had been engraved, 
and by 1845 the B minor Mass was in 
print.  The credit of having revived it belongs to 
Johann Nepomuk Schelble (1789-1837), conductor 
of the Frankfort Caecilienverein, though the Berlin 
Sing-Akademie was the first to give a performance, 
considerably curtailed, of the whole work in 1835.  
A little later, in the middle of the forties, Peters 
began to issue his <q>kritisch-korrecte</q> edition of 
the Organ works, which at length made Bach 
widely known among organists.  But the publication 
of the Cantatas proceeded slowly.  Only 
fourteen of them were in print in 1850, when the 
foundation of the Bachgesellschaft, on the centenary 
of Bach's death, focused a world-wide homage.  
When it dissolved in 1900 its mission was accomplished, 
the entire works<note place="foot">
<p>
So far the New Bachgesellschaft has published only a single 
Cantata overlooked by the old Society. See <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, p. 280.
</p>
</note>
of Bach were published, 
<pb n="xix" />
and the vast range of his genius was patent to the 
world.
</p>
<p>
It remains to discuss the first English version of 
Forkel's monograph, published in 1820, with the 
following title-page:
</p>
<quote rend="display">LIFE OF JOHN SEBASTIAN BACH; with a Critical View 
of his Compositions. By J. N. Forkel, Author of The Complete 
History of Music, etc., etc. Translated from the 
German.  London: Printed for T. Boosey and Co., Holles-Street,
Cavendish-Square. 1820.
</quote>
<p>
The book was published in February 1820; 
it was announced, with a slightly differently 
worded title-page, in the <title>New Monthly Magazine 
and Universal Register</title> for March 1820 (p. 341), 
and the <title>Scots Magazine</title> for the same month (
vol. lxxxv. p. 263).  The <title>New Monthly</title> states the 
price as 5s., the <title>Quarterly Review</title> (vol. xxiii. 
p. 281) as 6s.  The book contains xi+116+3 pages 
of Music Figures, crown octavo, bound in dark 
unlettered cloth.  It has neither Introduction, 
notes (other than Forkel's), nor indication of the 
translator's identity.  Much of the translation 
is so bad as to suggest grave doubts of the translator's 
comprehension of the German original; 
while his rendering of Forkel's critical chapters 
rouses a strong suspicion that he also lacked 
technical equipment adequate to his task.  It is, 
in fact, difficult to understand how such an unsatisfactory 
piece of work found its way into 
print.
</p>
<pb n="xx" />
<p>
The character of the 1820 translation has a close 
bearing upon its authorship.  In the article on 
Bach in the new <title>Grove</title> it is attributed to Samuel 
Wesley (1766-1837), an attractive suggestion, 
since Wesley was as enthusiastic a Bach pioneer 
in this country as Forkel himself was in Germany.  
But the statement is not correct.  In Samuel 
Wesley's <title>Letters to Mr. Jacobs relating to the 
Introduction into this Country of the Works of J. S. 
Bach</title> (London, 1875) we find the clue.  On 
October 17, 1808, Wesley writes: <q>We are (in 
the first place) preparing for the Press an authentic 
and accurate Life of Sebastian, which Mr. Stephenson the Banker (a most zealous and scientific 
member of our Fraternity) has translated into 
English from the German of Forkel.</q>
</p>
<p> 
Unfortunately, it is impossible to identify 
Stephenson precisely, or to detect his activities 
in the musical circle in which Wesley includes him.  
In 1820 there was in Lombard Street a firm of 
bankers under the style of <q>Remington, Stephenson, Remington, and Toulmin,</q> the active partner 
being Mr. Rowland Stephenson, a man of about 
forty in that year.  The firm was wound up in 
bankruptcy in 1829, Stephenson having absconded 
to America the previous year.  He appears to 
have been the only banker of that name holding 
such a recognised position as Wesley attributes to 
him, though it remains no more than a conjecture 
that he was the author of the translation issued in
<pb n="xxi" />
1820.<note place="foot">
<p>
In <title>The News</title> of January 4, 1829, he is described 
as the second 
son of the late John Stephenson of Great Ormonde Street, Queen 
Square, whom he had succeeded in the partnership of the firm.  His 
wife was dead, and of his eight children the eldest was also in the 
Bank.
</p>
</note>
But whoever <q>Stephenson the Banker</q> 
may have been, the poverty of his work fails to 
support Wesley's commendation of his <q>scientific</q>
equipment, and suggests that his purse rather 
than his talents were serviceable to Wesley's 
missionary campaign.
</p>
<p>
For the facts of Bach's life, and as a record of 
his artistic activities, Forkel admittedly is inadequate 
and often misleading.  Stephenson necessarily 
was without information to enable him to 
correct or supplement his author.  Recent research, 
and particularly the classic volumes of 
Spitta and Schweitzer, have placed the present 
generation in a more instructed and therefore 
responsible position.  The following pages, accordingly, 
have been annotated copiously in order to 
bring Forkel into line with modern scholarship.  
His own infrequent notes are invariably indicated 
by a prefixed asterisk.  It has been thought 
advisable to write an addendum to Chapter II. 
in order to supplement Forkel at the weakest 
point of his narrative.
</p>
<p>
Readers of Spitta's first volume probably will 
remember the effort to follow the ramifications of 
the Bach pedigree unaided by a genealogical 
Table.  It is unfortunate that Spitta did not
<pb n="xxii" />
set out in that form the wealth of biographical 
material his pages contain.  To supply the deficiency, 
and to illustrate Forkel's first Chapter, 
a complete Genealogical Table is provided in 
Appendix VI., based mainly upon the biographical 
details scattered over Spitta's pages.
</p>
<p>
In Chapter IX. Forkel gives a list of Bach's 
compositions known to him.  It is, necessarily, 
incomplete.  For that reason Appendices I. and 
II. provide a full catalogue of Bach's works 
arranged under the periods of his career.  In the 
case of the Oratorios, Cantatas, Motets, and
<q>Passions,</q> it is not difficult to distribute them 
upon a chronological basis.  The Clavier works 
also can be dated with some approximation to 
closeness.  The effort is more speculative in the 
case of the Organ music.
</p>
<p>
In his Preface Forkel suggests the institution of 
a Society for the publication and study of Bach's 
works.  The proposal was adopted after half a 
century's interval, and in Appendix III. will be 
found a complete and detailed catalogue of the 
publications of the Old and New Bachgesellschaft 
from 1850 to 1918 inclusive.  The Society's issues 
for 1915-18 have not yet reached this country.   
The present writer had an opportunity to examine 
them in the Library of the Cologne Conservatorium 
of Music in the spring of this year.
</p>
<p>
In this Introduction will be found a list of 
works bearing on Bach, which preceded Forkel's
<pb n="xxiii" />
monograph.  Appendix IV. provides a bibliography 
of Bach literature published subsequently 
to it.
</p>
<p>
Grateful acknowledgment is made to Mr. Ivor 
Atkins, of Worcester Cathedral, and to Mr. W. G. 
Whittaker, of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, who have 
read these pages in proof, and improved them by 
their criticism.
</p>
<closer>
<signed>C. S. T.</signed>
<dateline>October 1, 1919.</dateline>
</closer>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>FORKEL'S PREFACE</head>

<p>
Many years ago I determined to give the public 
an account of the life of Johann Sebastian Bach, 
with some reflections upon his genius and his 
works.  The brief article by Carl Philipp 
Emmanuel Bach<note place="foot">
<p>
Carl Philipp Emmanuel Bach, third 
son of Johann Sebastian 
Bach, b. 1714; Kammermusikus to Frederick the Great of Prussia
(1746), Kapellmeister at Hamburg (1768); d. 1788. 
</p>
</note>
and Herr Agricola,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Friedrich Agricola, of Dobitsch, b. 1720; studied 
composition 
with Bach at Leipzig; Court Composer (1751) and, after 
Carl Heinrich Graun's death (1759), Kapellmeister to Frederick the 
Great of Prussia; d. 1774. See Spitta, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach,</title> iii. 
243 ff. 
</p>
</note>
formerly 
composer to the Court of Prussia, contributed to 
the fourth volume of Mizler's <title>Musical Library,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Lorenz Christoph Mizler (1711-78), 
a pupil of Bach, founded at 
Leipzig in 1738 the <q>Sozietat der musikalischen Wissenschaften,</q> of 
which Bach and Handel were members.  Mizler's journal, the <title>Neuer&ouml;ffneter Musikalischer Bibliothek,</title> was its organ.  It appeared from 1736 
to 1754.  In Part I. of vol. iv. (1754) C. P. E. Bach and Agricola 
collaborated in the obituary notice, or <q>Nekrolog,</q> which is almost 
the earliest literary authority for Bach's life.  It covered less than 
twenty pages.  (See Schweitzer, <title>J. S. Bach</title> (trans. Ernest Newman), 
i. 189 ff. and Spitta, i. Pref.)  Agricola's association with Bach's son 
in the preparation of the obituary notice is explained by the fact that 
for the last ten years of Sebastian's life Agricola was in closer relations 
with him than Carl Philipp Emmanuel, who no longer was resident in 
Leipzig.
</p>
</note> 
can hardly be deemed adequate by Bach's admirers 
and, but for the desire to complete my
<pb n="xxv"/>
<title>General History of Music,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's <title>Allgemeine Geschichte der Musik</title> (2 vols. 1788-1801) 
had only come down to the sixteenth century when its author diverted 
his pen to a biography of Bach. 
</p>
</note>
I should have fulfilled my purpose 
long ago.  As Bach, more than any other 
artist, represents an era in the history of music, 
it was my intention to devote to the concluding 
volume of that work the materials I had collected 
for a history of his career.  But the announcement 
that Messrs. Hoffmeister and K&uuml;hnel, the Leipzig 
music-sellers and publishers, propose to issue a 
complete and critical edition of Bach's works has 
induced me to change my original plan.<note place="foot">
<p>
The firm of Hoffmeister and K&uuml;hnel 
was founded at Leipzig in 
1800 by Franz Anton Hoffmeister, who started, in 1801, a subscription 
for the publication of Bach's works, to which Forkel alludes.  The 
scheme failed to mature, and its accomplishment was reserved to C. F. 
Peters, who purchased Hoffmeister's <q>Bureau de Musique</q> in 
1814.  See articles on Hoffmeister and Peters in Grove's <title>Dictionary.</title>
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Messrs. Hoffmeister and K&uuml;nel's project promises 
at once to advance the art of music and 
enhance the honour of the German name.  For 
Bach's works are a priceless national patrimony; 
no other nation possesses a treasure comparable 
to it.  Their publication in an authoritative text 
will be a national service and raise an imperishable 
monument to the composer himself.  All who 
hold Germany dear are bound in honour to promote 
the undertaking to the utmost of their 
power.  I deem it a duty to remind the public of 
this obligation and to kindle interest in it in every 
true German heart.  To that end these pages
<pb n="xxvi" />
appear earlier than my original plan proposed; for they 
will enable me to reach a larger number 
of my fellow countrymen.  The section on Bach 
in my <title>History of Music</title> probably would have 
been read by a handful of experts or musical 
artists.  Here I hope to speak to a larger audience.  
For, let me repeat, not merely the interests of 
music but our national honour are concerned to 
rescue from oblivion the memory of one of 
Germany's greatest sons.
</p>
<p>
One of the best and most effective means of 
popularising musical masterpieces is to perform 
them in public.  In that way works of merit 
secure a widening audience.  People listen to 
them with pleasure in the concert room, church, 
or theatre, remember the agreeable impression 
they created, and purchase them when published, 
even though they cannot always play them.  But 
Bach's works unfortunately are rarely heard 
nowadays; for the number of persons capable 
of playing them adequately is at best inconsiderable.  
It would have been otherwise had 
Bach given touring performances of his music,<note place="foot">
<p>
Though Bach 
never ventured upon such tours as Mozart or 
Berlioz, for instance, undertook, he loved travelling, and his artistic 
journeys made him famous throughout Germany, at least as an 
organist.  Forkel himself describes (<foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, pp. 19, 23) his notable 
visits to the Courts of Berlin and Dresden.
</p>
</note> 
a labour for which he had neither time nor liking.  
Many of his pupils did so, and though their skill 
was inferior to their master's, the admiration
<pb n="xxvii" /> 
and astonishment they excited revealed the 
grandeur of his compositions.  Here and there, 
too, were found persons who desired to hear on 
their own instrument pieces which the performer 
had played best or gave them most pleasure.  
They could do so more easily for having heard 
how the piece ought to sound.
</p>
<p>
But, to awaken a wide appreciation of musical 
masterpieces depends upon the existence of good 
teachers.  The want of them is our chief difficulty.  
In order to safeguard their credit, the 
ignorant and incompetent of their number are 
disposed to decry good music, lest they should be 
asked to play it.  Consequently, their pupils, condemned 
to spend time, labour, and money on 
second-rate material, will not after half a dozen 
years, perhaps, show themselves farther advanced 
in sound musical appreciation than they were 
at the outset.  Whereas, under a good teacher, 
half the time, labour, and money produces progressive 
improvement.  Time will show whether 
this obstacle can be surmounted by making 
Bach's works accessible in the music shops and by 
forming a Society among the admirers of his 
genius to make them known and promote their 
study.<note place="foot">
<p>
In 1802, it must be remembered, not 
a note of Bach's concerted 
Church music was in print except the tunes he wrote for Schemelli's 
Hymn-book (1736) and the vocal parts of an early Cantata (No. 71).  
Of his instrumental works engraved by 1802 Forkel gives a list <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, 
p. 137.  It was hardly until the foundation of the Bachgesellschaft in
1850, to celebrate the centenary of Bach's death, that the systematic 
publication of his concerted Church music began.  Before that date, 
however, Peters of Leipzig had taken in hand the abandoned scheme 
of Hoffmeister and K&uuml;hnel, to which Forkel alludes, and in which he 
participated.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<pb n="xxviii" />
<p>
At any rate, if music is really an art, and not a 
mere pastime, its masterpieces must be more 
widely known and performed than in fact they 
are.  And here Bach, prince of classic composers, 
can render yeoman service.<note place="foot">
<p>
It is notable that Forkel makes 
no mention of Haydn, Mozart, or 
Handel, whose English domicile had divorced him from Germany's 
service.  Forkel's pessimism is the more curious, seeing that Beethoven 
was already thirty years old, and that Mozart in 1786, after giving 
him a subject to extemporise upon, had remarked, <q>Listen to that 
young man; he will some day make a noise in the world</q> (Holmes,
<title>Life of Mozart,</title> Dent's ed., p. 223).  Forkel, in fact, appreciated 
neither Mozart nor Beethoven and thoroughly detested Gluck.
</p>
</note>
For his music is 
so well calculated to educate the student to distinguish 
what is trivial from what is good, and to 
comport himself as an artist in whatever branch 
of the art he makes his own.  Moreover, Bach, 
whose influence pervades every musical form, can 
be relied on more than any other composer to 
correct the superficiality which is the bane of 
modern taste.  Neglect of the classics is as prejudicial 
to the art of music as it would be fatal to 
the interests of general culture to banish Greek 
and Latin writers from our schools.  Modern 
taste exhibits no shame in its preference for 
agreeable trifles, in its neglect of everything that 
makes a demand, however slight, upon its 
attention.  To-day we are menaced by a proposal
<pb n="xxix" />
to banish the classics from our schoolrooms.  
Equally short-sighted vision threatens to extinguish 
our musical classics as well.  And is it 
surprising?  Modern art displays such poverty and 
frivolity that it well may shrink from putting 
itself in context with great literature, particularly 
with Bach's mighty and creative genius, and seek 
rather to proscribe it.
</p>
<p>
I fain would do justice to the sublime genius 
of this prince of musicians, German and foreign!  
Short of being such a man as he was, dwarfing 
all other musicians from the height of his superiority, 
I can conceive no greater distinction than 
the power to comprehend and interpret him to 
others.<note place="foot">
<p>
As has been pointed out in the Introduction, Forkel stood almost 
alone in 1802 in his opinion of Bach's pre-eminence.  Even Beethoven 
placed Bach after Handel and Mozart, but knew little of his music on 
which to found a decision.
</p>
</note>
The ability to do so must at least connote 
a temperament not wholly alien from his own.  
It may even hint the flattering prospect that, if 
circumstances had opened up the same career, 
similar results might have been forthcoming.  I 
am not presumptuous to suggest such a result in 
my own case.  On the contrary I am convinced 
that there are no words adequate to express the 
thoughts Bach's transcendent genius stirs one to 
utter.  The more intimately we are acquainted 
with it the greater must be our admiration.  Our 
utmost eulogy, our deepest expressions of homage, 
<pb n="xxx" />
must seem little more than well-meant prattle.   
No one who is familiar with the work of other 
centuries will contradict or hold my statement 
exaggerated, that Bach cannot be named except 
in tones of rapture, and even of devout awe, by 
those who have learnt to know him.  We may 
discover and lay bare the secrets of his technique.  
But his power to inspire into it the breath of 
genius, the perfection of life and charm that 
moves us so powerfully, even in his slightest 
works, must always remain extraordinary and 
insoluble.
</p>
<p>
I do not choose to compare Bach with other 
artists.  Whoever is interested to measure him 
with Handel will find a just and balanced estimate 
of their relative merits, written by one fully informed 
for the task, in the first number of the 
eighty-first volume of the <title>Universal German 
Library,</title> pages 295-303.<note place="foot">
<p>
The 
anonymous article in the <title>Allgemeine deutsche Bibliothek,</title> to 
which Forkel alludes, deals with Bach's Clavier and Organ works and 
upon them asserts Bach's superiority over Handel.  The judgment 
was unusual.  Bach's fame was gravely prejudiced by German Handel-worship, which the first performance of the <title>Messiah</title> at Leipzig in 
1786 stimulated.  Johann Adam Hiller, Bach's third successor in the 
Cantorate of St. Thomas', was largely responsible.  He neglected, and 
even belittled, the treasures of Bach's art which the library of St. 
Thomas' contained.  See Schweitzer, i. 231. 
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
So far as it is not derived from the short article 
in Mizler's <title>Library</title> already mentioned,<note place="foot">
<p>
The <title>Nekrolog.</title> See 
<foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, p. xxiv.
</p>
</note>
I am indebted for my information to the two eldest
<pb n="xxxi" />
sons of Bach himself.<note place="foot">
<p>
Carl Philipp Emmanuel and Wilhelm Friedemann.  The latter 
was born in 1710, and after holding Organistships at Halle and Dresden, 
died at Berlin in 1784, leaving his widow and daughter in great poverty.  
The former received a grant from the receipts of the <title>Messiah</title>
performance alluded to in note 1, <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>.  A man of brilliant musical 
attainments, Wilhelm Friedemann's character was dissolute and unsteady. 
See Schweitzer, i. 146 ff.
</p>
</note>
Not only was I personally 
acquainted with them, but I corresponded 
regularly for many years with both,<note place="foot">
<p>
Two letters written by C. P. E. Bach to Forkel in 1775, conveying 
a good deal of information reproduced by Forkel in this monograph, 
are printed in facsimile by Dr. Max Schneider in his
<title>Bach-Urkunden</title> (N.B.G., XVII. (3)). 
</p>
</note>
 particularly 
Carl Philipp Emmanuel.  The world knows them 
as great artists.  But probably it is not aware 
that to the last moment of their lives they spoke 
of their father's genius with enthusiastic admiration.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's statement is entitled to respect. On the other hand 
there is nothing in the recorded careers of either of Bach's sons that 
bears him out on this point. Schweitzer (i. 229) endorses Elinor's 
judgment: <q>Bach's sons were the children of their epoch, and never 
understood their father; it was only from piety that they looked at 
him with childlike admiration.</q> Dr. Charles Burney spent several days 
with Carl Philipp Emmanuel at Hamburg in 1772, but during the 
whole time the son never played to him a note of his father's music.
</p>
</note>
From my early youth I have been inspired 
by an appreciation no less deep than theirs.  
It was a frequent theme of conversation and 
correspondence between us.
</p>
<p>
Thus, having been in a position to inform myself 
on all matters relating to Bach's life, genius, and 
work, I may fairly hold myself competent to communicate 
to the public what I have learnt and to 
offer useful reflections upon it.  I take advantage
<pb n="xxxii" />
of my opportunity the more readily because it permits me 
to draw attention to an enterprise<note place="foot">
<p>
i.e. Hoffmeister and K&uuml;hnel's project.
</p>
</note>
that promises to provide a worthy monument to 
German art, a gallery of most instructive models 
to the sincere artist, and to afford music lovers an 
inexhaustible source of sublimest pleasure. 
</p>
</div>

</front>

<body rend="page-break-before: right">

<pb n="1" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER I. THE FAMILY OF BACH</head>
<p>
If there is such a thing as inherited aptitude for 
art it certainly showed itself in the family of Bach.  
For six successive generations scarcely two or three 
of its members are found whom nature had not 
endowed with remarkable musical talent, and who 
did not make music their profession.<note place="foot">
<p>
The accuracy of this statement is apparent from the Genealogy 
appended to this volume.  Bach's sons represented the sixth generation 
from Veit Bach, the sixteenth century ancestor of the family.  
Veit himself was not a professional musician; one of his sons was a 
Spielmann; thereafter for the next 150 years all but seven of his descendants, 
whose professions are known, were Organists or Cantors or 
Town Musicians.  Many of them, moreover, were men of the highest 
attainments in their profession.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Veit Bach,<note place="foot">
<p>
He took his name from St. Vitus (Guy), patron saint of the church 
of Wechmar, a fact which sufficiently disproves Forkel's statement 
that his original domicile was in Hungary.  The Bachs were settled 
in Wechmar as early as <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1520.  Veit migrated thence to Hungary, 
though there is no adequate foundation for the statement that he 
settled at Pressburg.  He returned to Wechmar during the beginning 
of the Counter-Reformation under the Emperor Rudolph II. (1576- 
1612), and died at Wechmar, March 8, 1619.  See Spitta, i. 4.
</p>
<p>
Apart from church and town registers, laboriously consulted by 
Spitta in tracing the Bach genealogy, we owe our knowledge of it to 
an MS. drawn up by Bach in 1735 which is now in the Berlin Royal 
Library after being successively in the possession of Carl Philipp 
Emmanuel, Forkel, and G. P&ouml;lchau, the Hamburg teacher of music.
</p>
<p>
The original entries in it are stated by Carl P. Emmanuel to be by 
his father. Forkel also owned a Bach genealogical tree, given him by 
Carl Philipp Emmanuel; it has disappeared. Traces of it exist in 
a work published at Pressburg by Johann Matthias Korabinsky in 
1784, its insertion being due to the assumption that the Bachs were 
a Hungarian family.  Forkel shared that error.  See Spitta's Preface 
on the whole question.  The MS. genealogy of 1735 is published by 
the New Bachgesellschaft (XVIII. 3) in facsimile. 
</p>
</note>
 ancestor of this famous family, 
<pb n="2" />
gained a livelihood as a baker at Pressburg in 
Hungary.  When the religious troubles of the 
sixteenth century broke out he was driven to seek 
another place of abode, and having got together 
as much of his small property as he could, retired 
with it to Thuringia, hoping to find peace and 
security there.  He settled at Wechmar, a village 
near Gotha,<note place="foot">
<p>
Veit, in fact, returned to his native village. His 
name, as has 
been pointed out, implies a connection with Wechmar that must have 
dated from infancy.  Moreover, there was living there in 1561 one 
Hans Bach, an official of the municipality, who may be regarded 
confidently as Veit's father.
</p>
</note>
 where he continued to ply his trade 
as a baker and miller.<note place="foot">
<p>
It has been suggested that the name Bach is the sole authority 
for the statement that Veit was a baker.  But Spitta points out that 
the vowel in the name is pronounced long and was frequently written 
BAACH in the seventeenth century, a fact which makes it difficult to 
associate the word with <q>Backer</q> (Baker). 
</p>
</note>
In his leisure hours he 
was wont to amuse himself with the lute,<note place="foot">
<p>
In the Genealogy Johann Sebastian calls the instrument 
a Cythringen.
</p>
</note>
playing it amid the noise and clatter of the mill.  His 
taste for music descended to his two sons<note place="foot">
<p>
Hans Bach (d. Dec. 26, 1626) and (?) Lips Bach (d. Oct. 10, 1620). 
See <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, Genealogical Tables I. and II. and note to the latter.
</p>
</note>
and their children, and in time the Bachs grew to be 
a very numerous family of professional musicians,
<pb n="3" />
Cantors, Organists, and Town Musicians,<note place="foot">
<p>
The <q>Stadt Pfeiferei,</q>
or official town musical establishment, 
descended from the musicians' guilds of the Middle Ages and was presided 
over by the Stadt Musiker, who enjoyed certain ancient privileges 
and the monopoly of providing the music at open-air festivities.  
Johann Jakob Brahms, the father of Johannes, was a member of such 
a corporation at Hamburg, after having served his apprenticeship for 
five years elsewhere.  See Florence May, <title>Johannes Brahms,</title> vol. i. 
pp. 48 ff.
</p>
</note>
throughout  Thuringia.
</p>
<p>
Not all the Bachs, however, were great musicians.  
But every generation boasted some of them who 
were more than usually distinguished.  In the 
first quarter of the seventeenth century three 
of Veit Bach's grandchildren showed such exceptional 
talent that the Count of Schwarzburg-Arnstadt thought it worth while to send them at 
his expense to Italy, then the chief school of 
music, to perfect themselves in the art.<note place="foot">
<p>
See Genealogical Table II.  The three young Bachs were the sons 
of Lips Bach and, presumably, nephews of Hans the <q>Spielmann.</q> 
The youngest of them was named Jonas; the name of another was 
certainly Wendel.  It is remarkable, in a period in which Italy was 
regarded as the Mecca of musicians, that exceedingly few of the Bach 
family found their way thither.  Besides the three sons of Lips Bach, 
only Johann Nikolaus, 1669-1753 (see Table VI.), Johann Sebastian 
Bach's son Johann Christian, 1735-82 (see Table VIII.), and Carl P. E. 
Bach's son Sebastian (see Table VII.) seem to have visited Italy.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
We do 
not know whether they rewarded the expectations 
of their patron, for none of their works has survived. 
The fourth generation<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">i.e.</foreign>
from Veit Bach.  Of the three names Forkel mentions the 
first two were a generation before Johann Sebastian; the third, Johann 
Bombard, was of the same generation as Johann Sebastian; none of 
the three belonged to Johann Sebastian's branch.
</p>
</note>
of the family 
produced musicians of exceptional distinction,
<pb n="4"/>
and several of their compositions, thanks to Johann Sebastian Bach's 
regard for them, have 
come down to us. The most notable of these 
Bachs are:
</p>
<list>
<item n="1."> Johann Christoph Bach, Court and Town 
Organist at Eisenach.<note place="foot">
<p>
Eldest  son of Heinrich Bach (see Table VI.).  Whether he was 
Court as well as Town Organist at Eisenach cannot be stated positively. 
</p>
</note>
 He was particularly happy 
in his beautiful melodies and in setting words to 
music. In the <title>Archives of the Bachs,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
The <title>Alt-Bachische Archive</title> is 
a collection of the compositions of 
various members of the family, before and after Johann Sebastian, 
formed largely by the latter.  From C. P. E. Bach it passed to G. 
P&ouml;lchau and from him to the Berlin Royal Library. 
</p>
</note>
which 
was in Carl Philipp Emmanuel's possession at 
Hamburg, there is a Motet by Johann Christoph 
in which he boldly uses the augmented sixth, a 
proceeding considered extremely daring in his day.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Christoph composed several Motets (see them discussed 
in Spitta, i. 75 ff.).  The daring work to which Forkel alludes was 
written about 1680 and is lost.  Though the augmented sixth was 
then and remained unusual, Johann Christoph's is not the earliest use 
of it.  Spitta finds it in Giacomo Carissimi (1604-74).
</p>
</note> 
He was also an uncommon master of harmony, 
as may be inferred from a Cantata composed by 
him for Michaelmas, to the words <q>Es erhub sich 
ein Streit,</q> etc., which has twenty-two obbligato 
parts in correct harmony.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Cantata (<q>And there was war in heaven</q>) is analysed by 
Spitta (i. 44).  The score is unusually full: two five-part choirs; 
Vn. 1 and 2, 4 Violas, Contrabasso, Fagotto, 4 Trombe, Timpani, 
Organ.  In 1726 Johann Sebastian Bach wrote a Cantata for Michaelmas 
on the same text (Rev. xii. 7).
</p>
</note>
Yet another proof 
of his rare skill is in the alleged fact that he never
<pb n="5" />
played the Organ or Clavier in less than five parts.<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta (i. 101 n.) characterises the statement 
as <q>a mythical 
exaggeration.</q> In a chapter devoted to the instrumental works of 
Johann Christoph and his brother he instances a collection of forty-four
 Organ Chorals by the former, not one of which is in five parts.
</p>
</note>
Carl Philipp Emmanuel had a particularly 
warm regard for him.<note place="foot">
<p>
In the Bach genealogy already referred to C. P. E. Bach designates 
Johann Christoph a <q>great and impressive composer.</q>
</p>
</note> I remember the old man 
playing some of his compositions to me on the 
Clavier at Hamburg, and how quizzically he 
looked at me when one of these daring passages 
occurred.<note place="foot">
<p>
A <title>Lamento</title> published under Johann Christoph's 
name seems 
actually to have been composed by his father Heinrich (see Pirro, <title>J.-S. Bach,</title> 9 n.). Johann Christoph, however, is the composer of the 
Motet <title>Ich lasse dich nicht,</title> so often attributed to Johann Sebastian.
</p>
</note>
</item>
<item n="2.">
Johann Michael Bach, Organist and Town 
Clerk at Gehren.<note place="foot">
<p>
See Table VI. He was the father of Johann Sebastian's first wife. </p>
</note> He was the younger brother 
of Johann Christoph, and like him, a particularly 
good composer.  The Archives already mentioned<note place="foot">
<p>
See note, p. 4 <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>.
</p>
</note>
contain several of his Motets, including one for 
eight voices in double chorus,<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta (i. 59 ff.) mentions twelve Motets by Michael Bach. Several 
of them are for eight voices.  Forkel probably refers to the most 
remarkable of Michael's Motets, in which he detects the romantic 
spirit of Johann Sebastian.  It is set to the words <title>Unser Leben ist 
ein Schatten,</title> (<title>Life on earth is but a shadow</title>).  The first choir 
consists of 2 S., A., 2 T., B., and the second choir of A. T. B. only.  
Spitta analyses the work closely (i. 70-72). Novello publishes his five- 
part Motet <title>Christ is risen</title> with an English text.
</p>
</note> and many compositions 
for Church use.
</item>
<item n="3.">
Johann Bernhard Bach, Musician in the Prince's Kapelle and Organist at Eisenach.<note place="foot">
<p>
He succeeded his cousin Johann Christoph at Eisenach in 1703. 
</p>
</note>He is said to have composed remarkably fine Suites, 
or Overtures, in the French style.<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta (i. 24 ff.) mentions four Suites, or Overtures, Clavier pieces, and Organ Chorals as being by him.  That Johann Sebastian Bach highly esteemed the Suites is proved by the fact that he copied the parts of three of them with his own hand at Leipzig.</p>
</note>
</item>
</list>
<p>
Besides these three men, the Bachs boasted 
several able composers in the generations preceding 
Johann Sebastian,<note place="foot">
<p>
It is a curious fact that, prior to the career of Johann Sebastian Bach, the composers of the Bach family occur invariably in other branches than his.  With two exceptions, the gift of composition appears to have been possessed, or exercised, solely by Heinrich Bach (see Table VI.), his two sons Johann Christoph 
and Johann Michael, already discussed, and his grandson, Johann Nikolaus (son of Johann Christoph).  Heinrich Bach was a very productive composer in all forms of musical art employed at that time in church (Sp. i. 36).  His grandson, Johann Nikolaus, composed a Mass and a comic operetta (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign>, 132 ff.). The only other Bach composer known to Spitta is Georg Christoph, founder of the Franconian Bachs (see Table IV.) and Cantor at Themar and Schweinfurt (ib. 155). The other Bach composer outside Heinrich Bach's branch is Johann Bornhard, already mentioned by Forkel.</p>
</note> men who undoubtedly 
would have obtained higher positions, wider 
reputation, and more brilliant fortune if they 
could have torn themselves from their native 
Thuringia to display their gifts elsewhere in 
Germany or abroad. But none of the Bachs 
seems to have felt an inclination to migrate. 
Modest in their needs, frugal by nature and training, 
they were content with little, engrossed in 
and satisfied by their art, and wholly indifferent 
<pb n="7" />
to the decorations which great men of that time were wont to bestow on artists as special marks of honour. The fact that others who appreciated them were thus distinguished did not rouse the slightest envy in the Bachs.
</p>
<p>
The Bachs not only displayed a happy contentedness, indispensable for the cheery enjoyment of life, but exhibited a clannish attachment to each other.  They could not all live in the same locality.  But it was their habit to meet once a year at a time and place arranged beforehand.  These gatherings generally took place at Erfurt, Eisenach, and sometimes at Arnstadt.  Even after the family had grown very large, and many of its members had left Thuringia to settle in Upper and Lower Saxony and Franconia, the Bachs continued their annual meetings.  On these occasions music was their sole recreation.  As those present were either Cantors, Organists, or Town Musicians, employed in the service of the Church and accustomed to preface the day's work with prayer, their first act was to sing a Hymn.  Having fulfilled their religious duty, they spent the rest of the time in frivolous recreations.  Best of all they liked to extemporise a chorus out of popular songs, comic or jocular, weaving them into a harmonious whole while declaiming the words of each. They called this hotch-potch a <q>Quodlibet,</q> laughed uproariously at it, and roused equally hearty and irrepressible laughter 
<pb n="8" />
in their audience.<note place="foot">
<p>
In the Quodlibet different voices sang different well-known melodies, sacred and profane, and sought to combine them to form a harmonious whole.  For an example see Variation 30 of the <title>Aria mit 30 Veranderungen</title> (Peters' ed., bk. 209 p. 83).  In it Bach combines two popular songs of his period.
</p>
</note> It is suggested that German Comic Opera has its origin in these trifles.  But the <q>Quodlibet</q> was a familiar institution in Germany at a much earlier period.  I possess a collection of them printed and published at Vienna in 1542.<note place="foot">
<p>
See article <q>Quodlibet</q> in Grove.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
But these light-hearted Thuringians, and even those of their family who treated their art more seriously and worthily, would not have escaped oblivion had there not emerged in the fulness of time one whose genius and renown reflected their splendour and brilliancy on his forbears.  This man, the glory of his family, pride of his countrymen, most gifted favourite of the Muse of Music, was Johann Sebastian Bach.
</p>

<figure url="images/eisenach.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Bach's Home at Eisenach</head>
<figDesc>Bach's Home at Eisenach</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>


<pb n="9" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>Chapter II. THE CAREER OF BACH</head>
<p>
Johann Sebastian Bach was born on March 21, 1685,<note place="foot">
<p>
The date is conjectural, and is deduced from the fact that the infant was baptized on March 23.  The Gregorian Calendar was not adopted in Germany until 1701.  Had it been in use in 1685 Bach's birthday would be March 31.
</p>
</note> at Eisenach, where his father, Johann Ambrosius Bach, was Court and Town Musician.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Ambrosius' Court appointment is to be inferred from the fact that in 1684 the Duke refused him permission to return to Erfurt.
</p>
</note> Johann Ambrosius had a twin brother, Johann Christoph, Musician to the Court and Town of Arnstadt,<note place="foot">
<p>
See Table IV.
</p>
</note> who so exactly resembled him that even their wives could distinguish them only by their dress.  The twins appear to have been quite remarkable.  They were deeply attached, alike in disposition, in voice, and in the style of their music.  If one was ill, so was the other.  They died within a short time of each other, and were objects of wondering interest to all who knew them.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Ambrosius survived his brother by nearly eighteen months.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
In 1695, when Johann Sebastian was not quite ten years old, his father died. He lost his mother at an earlier period.<note place="foot">
<p>
His mother died in May 1694, and his father in January 1695.  At the latter date Johann Sebastian was three months short of his tenth year.
</p>
</note> So, being left an orphan,
<pb n="10" />
he became dependent on his eldest brother, Johann Christoph, Organist at Ohrdruf,<note place="foot">
<p>
Excepting Johann Jakob, a lad of thirteen years, Johann Christoph was Bach's only surviving brother, and the only one of the family in a position to look after him.  Johann Jakob accompanied Sebastian to Ohrdruf (Pirro, p. 13) and afterwards apprenticed himself to his father's successor as Town Musician at Eisenach. One of the daughters was already married.  What became of the other is not stated. See Table V.
</p>
</note> from whom he received his earliest lessons on the Clavier.<note place="foot">
<p>
It is difficult to believe this statement.  That the boy was destined for a musical career by his father hardly can be doubted.  That he was of unusual precocity, the story told by Forkel in the text proves.  His father's asserted neglect to instruct him is therefore hardly credible.
</p>
</note> His inclination and talent for music must already have been pronounced.  For his brother no sooner had given him one piece to learn than the boy was demanding another more difficult.  The most renowned Clavier composers of that day were Froberger,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Jakob Froberger, born at Halle (date unknown); Court Organist at Vienna, 1637-57; d. 1667.
</p>
</note> Fischer,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Caspar Ferdinand Fischer, c. 1660-1738 (actual dates of his birth and death unknown); Kapellmeister to Markgraf Ludwig of Baden at Schloss Schlackenwerth in Bohemia. His <title>Ariadne Musica Neo-Organoedum</title> (1702) was the precursor of Bach's <title>Das wohltemperirte Clavier.</title>
</p>
</note> Johann Caspar Kerl,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Caspar Kerl, b. 1628; Kapellmeister in Munich, 1656-74; Court Organist at Vienna, 1677-92; d. 1693.
</p>
</note> Pachelbel,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Pachelbel, b. 1653, d. 1706.  In 1695 he was Organist of St. Sebald's Church, N&uuml;rnberg.  His influence upon the organ playing of his generation was enormous.  Bach's brother, Johann Christoph, was his pupil.
</p>
</note> Buxtehude,<note place="foot">
<p>
Dietrich Buxtehude, b. 1637, d. 1707; Organist (1668) of the Marienkirche, L&uuml;beck, and the chief musical influence in North Germany.
</p>
</note> Bruhns,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nikolaus Bruhns, b. <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1665, d. 1697; a. pupil of Buxtehude; Organist at Husum; the greatest organist of his time after Buxtehude.
</p>
</note>
<pb n="11" /> and B&ouml;hm.<note place="foot">
<p>
Georg B&ouml;hm, b. 1661; date of death uncertain (c. 1739); from 1698 Organist of the Johanniskirche, L&uuml;neburg.
</p>
</note> Johann Christoph possessed a book containing several pieces by these masters, and Bach begged earnestly for it, but without effect.  Refusal increasing his determination, he laid his plans to get the book without his brother's knowledge.  It was kept on a book-shelf which had a latticed front.  Bach's hands were small.  Inserting them, he got hold of the book, rolled it up, and drew it out.  As he was not allowed a candle, he could only copy it on moonlight nights, and it was six months before he finished his heavy task.  As soon as it was completed he looked forward to using in secret a treasure won by so much labour.  But his brother found the copy and took it from him without pity, nor did Bach recover it until his brother's death soon after.<note place="foot">
<p>
In fact, Johann Christoph did not die until 1721, more than twenty years after Sebastian ceased to be under his roof.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Being once more left destitute,<note place="foot">
<p>
The fact that Johann Christoph survived till 1721 disproves Forkel's statement. The youthful Bach, aged fifteen in 1700, no doubt seized the earliest opportunity to relieve his brother of the charge of him.  Moreover, Johann Christoph's family was increasing (see Table V.).  In spite of the story of Bach's midnight copying, it cannot be questioned that he owed a good deal to his brother, who not only taught him but, presumably, maintained him at the Ohrdruf Lyceum, where Bach acquired a sound education and a considerable knowledge of Latin.  See Pirro, pp. 14-16, on Bach's education at Ohrdruf.  He left the Lyceum in March 1700.
</p>
</note> Johann Sebastian set out for L&uuml;neburg with one of his Ohrdruf schoolfellows, named Erdmann<note place="foot">
<p>
Georg Erdmann, Bach's fellow-pupil at the Lyceum.
</p>
</note> (afterwards Russian Resident at Danzig), and entered the choir of St. Michael's Convent.  His fine treble voice procured him a fair livelihood. But unfortunately he soon lost it and did not at once develop another.
<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach's entry into the choir of St. Michael's Convent, L&uuml;neburg, took place about Easter 1700.  The step was taken upon the advice of Elias Herda, Cantor at the Ohrdruf Lyceum, himself a former member of St. Michael's.  Bach remained at St. Michael's for three years, till 1703.  The choir library was particularly rich in the best church music of the period, both German and Italian.  Spitta is of opinion that Bach's talents as a violinist and Clavier player were also laid under contribution.  His voice, as Forkel states, soon ceased to be serviceable.  His maximum pay was one thaler (three shillings) a month and free commons.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Meanwhile his ambition to play the Organ and Clavier remained as keen as ever, and impelled him to hear and practise everything that promised him improvement.  For that purpose, while he was at L&uuml;eburg, he several times travelled to Hamburg to hear the famous organist,<note place="foot">
<p>
Probably Georg B&ouml;hm, who had relations with the Convent choir, inspired Bach to make the pilgrimage.  B&ouml;hm, then at St. John's, L&uuml;neburg, was a pupil of Reinken of Hamburg.  Spitta (i. 196) suggests that Bach's cousin, Johann Ernst (see Table IV.), was at this time completing his musical education at Hamburg, a fact which may have contributed to draw Bach thither.  He made more than one visit, on foot, to Hamburg.  F. W. Marpurg published, in 1786, the story, which he received from Bach himself, that on one of his journeys from Hamburg, Bach sat down outside an inn and hungrily sniffed the savours from its kitchen.  His pockets were empty and there seemed little prospect of a meal, when a window was opened and two herring heads were thrown out.  Bach picked them up eagerly, and found in each of them a Danish ducat.  Who was his benefactor he never discovered; the gift enabled him to satisfy his hunger and pay another visit to Hamburg.
</p>
</note> Johann
<pb n="13" />
Adam Reinken.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Adam Reinken, b. 1623, became Organist of St. Catherine's Church, Hamburg, in 1664, and held the post until his death in 1722.
</p>
</note> Often, too, he walked to Celle to hear the Duke's French band play French music, which was a novelty in those parts.<note place="foot">
<p>
His introduction to French music marked another step in Bach's
progressive education.  The reigning Duke of Celle (father-in-law of
George I. of Great Britain and Ireland) had married a Frenchwoman.  See Pirro, <title>J. S. Bach,</title> pp. 24-27.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
The date and circumstances of his removal from L&uuml;neburg to Weimar are not precisely known.<note place="foot">
<p>
He entered the Weimar service on April 8, 1703 (Pirro, p. 29).
</p>
</note> He certainly became Court Musician there in 1703, when he was just over eighteen years of age.<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach's engagement was in the private band of the younger brother of the Duke.  He remained in his new post only a few months.  He was engaged as a Violin player, and since his interests were towards the Organ and Clavier, it is clear that he accepted the engagement as a temporary means of livelihood.
</p>
</note> But in the following year he gave up the post on his appointment as Organist to the new Church at Arnstadt, probably desiring to develop his taste for the Organ and realising that he would have better opportunities to do so at Arnstadt than at Weimar, where he was engaged simply to play the Violin.<note place="foot">
<p>
He is, however, described in July 1703 as Court Organist (Pirro, p. 30).  Bach was drawn to Arnstadt chiefly by the fact that the New Church recently had been equipped with a particularly fine Organ (specification in Spitta, i. 224), which existed until 1863.  Bach inaugurated it on July 13, 1703, and entered on his duties as Organist of the church in the following month (Pirro, p. 30).
</p>
</note> At Arnstadt he set himself assiduously to study the works of the celebrated organists of the period, so far as his modest means permitted him, and in order to improve himself 
<pb n="14" />
in composition<note place="foot">
<p>
His earliest Church Cantata (No. 15) was composed here in 1704.  To the Arnstadt period (1703-7) also must be attributed the Capriccio written on the departure of his brother, Johann Jakob (Peters bk. 208 p. 62), the Capriccio in honour of his Ohrdruf brother, Johann Christoph (Peters bk. 215, p. 34), the Sonata in D major (Peters bk. 215, p. 44), the Organ Prelude and Fugue in C minor (Novello bk. 2 p. 48), and the Organ Fugue in C minor (Novello bk. 12 p. 95).
</p>
</note> and Organ playing,<note place="foot">
<p>
In the <title>Nekrolog</title> C. P. E. Bach and Agricola remark of the Arnstadt period, that Bach then <q>really showed the first-fruits of his industry in the art of Organ-playing and composition, which he had in great measure learnt only from the study of the works of the most famous composers of the time, and from his own reflections on them</q> (quoted in Spitta, i. 235).
</p>
</note> walked the whole way to L&uuml;beck to hear Dietrich Buxtehude, Organist of St. Mary's Church in that city, with whose compositions he was acquainted already. He remained there about three months,<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach's stipend at Arnstadt was not inconsiderable, and his duties engaged him only at stated hours on Sundays, Mondays, and Thursdays.  He, therefore, had leisure and the means to employ it.  In October 1705 he obtained four weeks' leave of absence and set off on foot to L&uuml;beck, after leaving an efficient deputy behind him.  He stayed away until February 1706.  On his return the Consistory demanded an explanation of his absence, and took the opportunity to remonstrate with him on other matters.  They charged him <q>with having been hitherto in the habit of making surprising <foreign lang="it">variationes</foreign> in the Chorals, and intermixing divers strange sounds, so that thereby the congregation were confounded.</q>  They charged him with playing too long preludes, and after this was notified to him, of making them too short.  They reproached him <q>with having gone to a wineshop last Sunday during sermon,</q> and cautioned him that, <q>for the future he must behave quite differently and much better than he has done hitherto</q> (see the whole charge in Spitta, i. 315 ff.).  Bach also was on bad terms with the choir, whose members had got out of hand and discipline.  Before his L&uuml;beck visit he engaged in a street brawl with one of the scholars.  Then, as later, he was a choleric gentleman.  In November 1706 he got into further trouble for having <q>made music</q> in the church with a <q>stranger maiden,</q> presumably his cousin Maria Barbara Bach, then on a visit to Arnstadt; he married her a year later.  Clearly the relations between the Consistory and the brilliant young Organist were becoming difficult, and Bach's migration to M&uuml;hlhausen no doubt was grateful to both.  His resignation was made formally on June 29, 1707.
</p>
</note> listening
<pb n="15" />
to the celebrated Organist, but without making himself known to him, and returned to Arnstadt with his experience much increased.
</p>
<p>
Bach's zeal and persevering diligence had already drawn attention to him, as is evident from the fact that he received in succession several offers of vacant organistships, one of which, at the Church of St. Blasius, M&uuml;hlhausen, he accepted in 1707.<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach was appointed on June 15, 1707, to succeed Johann Georg Able. M&uuml;hlhauson prided itself upon its musical traditions.  Bach's Cantata, No. 71, written in February 1708 for the inauguration of the M&uuml;hlhausen Town Council, was engraved (the parts only), the only one of the 206 Cantatas which have come down to us which was printed during Bach's lifetime.  He also composed Cantatas 131 and 196 at Muhlhausen, and perhaps three others. See <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, p. 188.
</p>
</note> Barely a year after he entered upon his duties there<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach's petition to the M&uuml;hlhausen Consistory for permission to resign his post is dated June 25, 1708, and is printed in full by Spitta, i. 373.  Bach mentions the Weimar post as having been offered to him, but bases his desire to resign the organ of St. Blasius, partly on the ground that his income was inadequate, partly because, though he had succeeded in improving the organ and the conditions of music generally, he saw <q>not the slightest appearance that things will be altered</q> for the better.  M&uuml;hlhausen, in fact, was a stronghold of Pietism and unsympathetic to Bach's musical ideals.
</p>
</note> he again visited Weimar and played to the Duke, who was so pleased with his performance that he offered him the post of Court Organist, which he accepted.<note place="foot">
<p>
He was Court Organist and Kammermusikus.  In the latter post Bach was of use as a Violinist and Clavier player.  The Court band, or Kapelle, on special occasions appeared in Hungarian costume, which Bach presumably donned.  His income began at a sum nearly double that he had received at Arnstadt and M&uuml;hlhausen.
</p>
</note> Weimar promised
<pb n="16" />
him a particularly agreeable atmosphere in which to cultivate his genius.<note place="foot">
<p>
The character of his employer, Duke Wilhelm Ernst of Saxe-Weimar, must be reckoned a factor in the development of the youthful Bach.  The Duke was not only a cultured artist, but was also a man of genuine piety.
</p>
</note> He applied himself closely to his work, and probably at this period achieved the mastery of the Organ that he ever afterwards possessed.  At Weimar also he wrote his great compositions for that instrument.<note place="foot">
<p>
Though Bach retouched them in later years and wrote others, it may be stated in general terms that his Organ works were the fruit of the Weimar period, which lasted from 1708 till 1717.
</p>
</note> In 1717<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach's promotion to the position of Concertmeister had taken place certainly before March 19, 1714, on which date Spitta (i. 517) prints a letter in which Bach gives himself the title.  The increase in his income early in 1714 also supports the conclusion, while a letter of January 14, 1714, written by Bach, is not signed by him as Concertmeister.  It would seem that his promotion took place in the interval between the two letters.  As Concertmeister it was part of his duty to provide Cantatas for the church services.  Twenty-two were written by him at Weimar.  See <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, p. 188, for a list of them.
</p>
</note> the Duke appointed him Concertmeister, a post which gave him further opportunity to develop his art, since it required him to compose and direct Church music.
</p>
<p>
It was about this time that Zachau, Handel's master, died at Halle, where he was Organist.<note place="foot">
<p>
Friedrich Wilhelm Zachau died on August 7 or 14, 1712.
</p>
</note> Bach, who by now had acquired a great reputation, was invited to succeed him.<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta (i. 513) infers that, in the later years of the Weimar period, Bach spent part of the autumn of every year in visits to the Courts and larger towns of Germany in order to give Organ recitals and to conduct performances of his Cantatas. Besides the visit to Halle, in 1713, to which Forkel alludes, Bach performed at Cassel in 1713 or 1714 before the future Frederick I. of Sweden, who presented him with a ring which he drew from his finger.  Bach's feet, an admirer recorded, <q>flew over the pedal-board as if they had wings.</q> In December 1714 he visited Leipzig and performed Cantata No. 61, <title>Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland.</title>  In 1716 he was again invited to Halle, and at about the same time performed at Meiningen. Forkel records the famous contest with Marchand, the French Organist, at Dresden in 1717.
</p>
</note> He visited Halle
<pb n="17" />
and composed a work as a specimen of his skill But for some reason unknown he did not obtain the post.  It was given to a clever pupil of Zachau, named Kirchhoff.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's brief account follows the <title>Nekrolog.</title>  Bach was in Halle in the autumn of 1713, a year after Zachau's death.  The latter's post was still vacant and a new and particularly large Organ (sixty-three speaking stops) was being erected.  The authorities pressed Bach to submit himself to the prescribed tests, and he complied so far as to compose a Cantata and to conduct a performance of it.  On his return to Weimar he received a formal invitation to accept the post.  After some correspondence Bach refused it, partly, perhaps chiefly, on the ground that the income was inadequate.  The refusal was answered by the groundless accusation that he had merely entertained the Halle proposal in order to bring pressure upon Weimar for a rise of salary.  The misunderstanding was cleared away by 1716, when Bach visited Halle again.  In the interval Zachau's post had been given to his pupil, Gottfried Kirchhoff.  The whole matter is discussed at length in Spitta, i. 515 ff.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Johann Sebastian was now thirty-two years old. He had made good use of his opportunities, had studied hard as a player and composer, and by tireless enthusiasm had so completely mastered every branch of his art, that he towered like a giant above his contemporaries. Both amateurs and professional musicians already regarded him with admiration when, in 1717, Marchand, the French virtuoso, a celebrated Clavier and
<pb n="18" />
Organ player, visited Dresden.  He played before the King-Elector<note place="foot">
<p>
Frederick Augustus I. of Saxony was elected, as Augustus II., to the throne of Poland in 1697. He died In 1733.
</p>
</note> and won such approbation that he was offered a large salary to enter His Majesty's service.<note place="foot">
<p>
Louis Marchand, b. 1669, d. 1732; Organist to the French Court and later of the Church of St. Honor&eacute;, Paris.  His arrival in Dresden was due to his being in disgrace at Versailles. Whether or not he was offered a permanent engagement at the Saxon Court, he was regarded as the champion of the French style, and as such the challenge was issued to him by Bach.
</p>
</note> Marchand's chief merit was his finished technique.  Like Couperin,<note place="foot">
<p>
Francois Couperin, b. 1668, d. 1733; Organist of St. Gervais, Paris.  Forkel's judgment upon his art is not supported by modern criticism.
</p>
</note> his musical ideas were weak to the point of banality, as we may judge from his compositions.<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach, however, admired Marchand's compositions sufficiently to give them to his pupils. See Pirro, p. 52.
</p>
</note> Bach was an equally finished player, and so rich in ideas that Marchand's head would have swollen had he been equally gifted.  Volumier, Concertmeister at Dresden,<note place="foot">
<p>
Jean-Baptiste Volumier, an acquaintance of Bach, according to Spitta (i. 583). Eitner, <title>Quellen Lexikon.</title> says that he was born in Spain and educated in France.  Grove's <title>Dictionary</title> declares him a Belgian.  In 1709 he was appointed Concertmeister to the Saxon Court.  He died at Dresden in 1728.
</p>
</note> was aware of these circumstances, and knowing that the young German had his instrument and his imagination under the fullest control, determined to arrange a contest between the two men in order to give his sovereign the satisfaction of judging their merits.  With the King's approbation, a message was dispatched
<pb n="19" />
to Bach at Weimar<note place="foot">
<p>
It is more probable that Bach was at Dresden either expressly to hear Marchand or upon one of his autumn tours.
</p>
</note> inviting him to a contest with Marchand.  Bach accepted the invitation and set out at once on his journey.  Upon his arrival at Dresden Volumier procured him an opportunity to hear Marchand secretly.  Far from being discouraged by what he heard, Bach wrote a polite note to the French artist challenging him to a trial of skill, and offering to play at sight anything Marchand put before him, provided the Frenchman submitted himself to a similar test.  Marchand accepted the challenge, a time and place for the contest were fixed, and the King gave his approval.  At the appointed hour a large and distinguished company assembled in the house of Marshal Count Flemming.<note place="foot">
<p>
Some years earlier Flemming had witnessed Handel's triumphant descent on the Saxon Court, but had failed to establish friendly relations with him.  See Streatfield's <title>Handel</title>, p. 87.
</p>
</note> Bach arrived punctually; Marchand did not appear.  After considerable delay he was sought at his lodging, when it was discovered, to the astonishment of all, that he had left Dresden that morning without taking leave of anybody.  Bach therefore performed alone, and excited the admiration of all who heard him, though Volumier was cheated of his intention to exhibit the inferiority of French to German art.  Bach was overwhelmed with congratulations; but the dishonesty of a Court official is said to have
<pb n="20" />
intercepted a present of one hundred louis d'or sent to him by the King.<note place="foot">
<p>
The article on Marchand in Grove gives a different version of the affair, based upon Joseph F&eacute;tis (1784-1871).  According to this story of the event, Bach, summoned from Weimar, attended Marchand's concert incognito, and after hearing Marchand perform, was invited by Volumier to take his seat at the Clavier.  Bach thereupon repeated from memory Marchand's theme and variations, and added others of his own.  Having ended, he handed Marchand a theme for treatment on the Organ and challenged him to a contest.  Marchand accepted it, but left Dresden before the appointed hour.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach had not long returned to Weimar when Prince Leopold of Anhalt-C&ouml;then, a good judge of music and a first-rate amateur,<note place="foot">
<p>
The Prince was brother-in-law of Duke Ernst August of Saxe-Weimar.  Bach was, therefore, already known to him and showed the greatest regard for him both at C&ouml;then and after he had left his service.
</p>
</note> offered him the post of Kapellmeister.  He entered at once upon his new office<note place="foot">
<p>
The reason for Bach's migration from Weimar to C&ouml;then was his failure to obtain the post of Kapellmeister at the former Court upon the death of Johann Samuel Drese in 1716. The post was given to Drese's son. On August 1, 1717, just before or after his Marchand triumph, Bach was appointed Kapellmeister to the Court of C&ouml;then.  Duke Wilhelm Ernst refused to release him from his engagement, and Bach endured imprisonment from November 6 to December 2, 1717, for demanding instant permission to take up his new post.  Probably his last work at Weimar was to put the <title>Orgelb&uuml;chlein</title> into the form in which it has come down to us (see articles by the present writer in <title>The Musical Times</title> for January-March 1917).
</p>
<p>
With his departure from Weimar in 1718 Bach left behind him the distinctively Organ period of his musical fertility.  Though his compositions were still by no means generally known, as a player he held an unchallenged pre-eminence.
</p>
</note> and held it for about six years.<note place="foot">
<p>
He was appointed to C&ouml;then on August 1, 1717, and was inducted at Leipzig on May 31, 1723.
</p>
</note> At this period, about 1722,<note place="foot">
<p>
The date actually was November 1720.  At C&ouml;then Bach had an inferior Organ and little scope for his attainments; his chief duties were in connection with the Prince's band.  The yearning to get back to the Organ, which eventually took him to Leipzig in 1723, shows itself in his readiness to entertain an invitation to Hamburg in 1720.
</p>
</note> he visited
<pb n="21" />
Hamburg, played the Organ there, and excited general admiration.  The veteran Reinken&mdash;he was nearly one hundred years old&mdash;was particularly impressed by Bach's performance.  After he had treated the Choral <title>An Wasserfl&uuml;ssen Babylon</title> for half an hour in variation after variation in the true Organ style,<note place="foot">
<p>
Three Organ movements by Bach upon Wolfgang Dachstein's melody, <title>An Wasserfl&uuml;ssen Babylon,</title> are extant.  See notes upon them and their relation to the Hamburg extemporisation in Terry, <title>Bach's Chorals,</title> Part III.
</p>
</note> Reinken paid him the compliment of saying, <q>I thought this art was dead, but I see that it survives in you.</q>  Reinken had treated the same Choral in a similar manner some years before and had had his work engraved, showing that he thought highly of it.  His praise therefore was particularly flattering to Bach.<note place="foot">
<p>
As at Halle in 1713, Bach does not appear to have gone to Hamburg specially to compete for the post of Organist to the Church of St. James, vacant by the death of Heinrich Friese in September 1720.  He was not able to stay to take part in the final tests, nor was he asked to submit to them, since his visit to Hamburg had given him an opportunity to display his gifts.  In the result the post was given to Johann Joachim Heitmann, who acknowledged his appointment by forthwith paying 4000 marks to the treasury of the Church.  See Spitta, ii. 17 ff.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
On the death of Kuhnau in 1723<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Kuhnau died on June 25, 1722.
</p>
</note> Bach was appointed Director of Music and Cantor to St. Thomas' School, Leipzig,<note place="foot">
<p>
On the title-pages of his published works Bach describes himself as <q>Capellm. und Direct. Chor. Mus. Lips.</q>
</p>
</note> a position which he
<pb n="22" />
occupied until his death.  Prince Leopold of Anhalt-C&ouml;then had great regard for him and Bach left his service with regret.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel has practically nothing to say regarding the Leipzig period of Bach's musical life.  That a professed historian of music, setting before the public for the first time the life of one whom he so greatly extolled, and with every inducement to present as complete a picture of him as was possible, should have taken no trouble to carry his investigations beyond the point C. P. E. Bach and Agricola had reached in the <title>Nekrolog</title> of 1754 is almost incredible.  The only reason that can be adduced, apart from the lack of a really scientific impulse, is that Forkel was almost entirely ignorant of the flood of concerted church music which poured from Leipzig from 1723 to 1744.  His criticism of Bach as a composer is restricted practically to Bach's Organ and Clavier works.
</p>
</note>
 But he saw the finger of Providence in the event; for the Prince died shortly afterwards.<note place="foot">
<p>
On November 19, 1728.  Latterly his interest in music had waned.  The fact, along with Bach's concern for the education of his sons and his desire to return to the Organ, explains his abandonment of the more dignified C&ouml;then appointment.
</p>
</note>
 The loss of his patron affected him deeply, and moved him to compose a funeral Cantata containing remarkably fine double choruses which he himself conducted at C&ouml;then.<note place="foot">
<p>
The score of this work was in Forkel's possession, but was missing from his library in 1818 and was assumed to be lost until, in 1873, Rust was able to show that Bach used for the occasion certain choruses and Arias from the <title>St. Matthew Passion,</title> which he was then writing, with the first chorus of the <title>Trauer-Ode</title> as an opening of the extemporised work.  See Spitta, ii. 618; Schweitzer, ii. 208.
</p>
</note>
 While he was at St. Thomas' he was appointed honorary Kapellmeister to the Duke of Weissenfels<note place="foot">
<p>
In 1723 he received the title <foreign lang="de">Hochf&uuml;rstlich Weissenfelsische wirkliche Kapellmeister</foreign> and retained it till his death.  He retained also his C&ouml;then appointment.
</p>
</note>
 and, in the following year
<pb n="23" />
(1736), received the title of Court Composer to the King-Elector of Poland-Saxony.<note place="foot">
<p>
Augustus III. Bach had petitioned for the appointment in a letter dated July 27, 1733 (Spitta, iii. 38), forwarding a copy of the newly-written Kyrie and Gloria of the B minor Mass.
</p>
</note>
 The two compliments are not of great consequence, and the second was to some degree corollary to Bach's position as Cantor of St. Thomas' School.<note place="foot">
<p>
There does not appear to be any ground for the suggestion that the post of Hofcomponist to the Dresden Court was attached <foreign lang="la">ex officio</foreign> to the St. Thomas' Cantorate.  Bach applied for it in 1733, taking advantage of the recent accession of the new sovereign, Augustus III., in February 1733.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Carl Philipp Emmanuel, Bach's second son, entered the service of Frederick the Great of Prussia in 1740.  So widely was Bach's skill recognised by this time that the King, who often heard him praised, was curious to meet so great an artist.  More than once he hinted to Carl Philipp Emmanuel that it would be agreeable to welcome his father to Potsdam, and as Bach did not appear, desired to know the reason.  Carl Philipp did not fail to acquaint his father with the King's interest.  But for some time Bach was too occupied with his duties to accede to the invitation.  However, as Carl Philipp continued to urge him, he set out for Potsdam towards the end of 1747, in company with his eldest son, Wilhelm Friedemann.<note place="foot">
<p>
Friedemann was then at Halle.
</p>
</note>
 It was the King's custom to hold a private concert 
<pb n="24" />
every evening, and to take part on the flute in a Concerto or two. One evening,<note place="foot">
<p>
May 7, 1747, according to Spitta, quoting Friedrich Wilhelm Marpurg's <title>Historisch-kritische Beytr&auml;ge zur Aufnahme der Musik,</title> which appeared in 5 vols. between 1754-1778.  On the other hand, Spener, who first records the event, states briefly: <q>May 11,1747.  His Majesty was informed that Kapellmeister Bach had arrived in Potsdam, and that he was in the King's ante-chamber, waiting His Majesty's gracious permission to enter, and hear the music.  His Majesty at once commanded that he should be admitted</q> (Spitta, iii. 231 n.).  If the Marpurg and Spener dates are reliable, it looks as though Friedemann's story of his father, travel-stained and weary, being hurried incontinent into the presence of the King is a piece of picturesque embroidery.
</p>
</note>
 when he had got out his flute and the musicians were at their desks, an official brought him a list of the strangers newly arrived at Potsdam.  Flute in hand the King ran through the names, and suddenly turning to the waiting musicians, said with considerable excitement, <q>Gentlemen, Old Bach has arrived.</q>  The flute was put away for the evening, and Bach, who had alighted at his son's lodging, was summoned immediately to the Palace.  Wilhelm Friedemann, who accompanied his father, often told me the story.  Nor am I likely to forget the racy manner in which he related it.  The courtesy of those days demanded rather prolix compliments, and the first introduction of Bach to so illustrious a monarch, into whose presence he had hurried without being allowed time to change his travelling dress for a Cantor's black gown, obviously invited ceremonial speeches on both sides.  I will not dwell on them; Wilhelm Friedemann related
<pb n="25" />
a lengthy and formal conversation between the King and the Cantor.<note place="foot">
<p>
Clearly this was a story that Wilhelm Friedemann prided himself on the telling, and Forkel's remark suggests the need for caution in accepting all its details.  Frederick's courtesy to Bach, however, tends to discredit the story that ten years earlier (1737) Handel deliberately refused to meet the King at Aix-la-Chapelle owing to the peremptoriness of his summons.  Mr. Streatfleld (p. 145) also shows that Frederick was not at Aix until 1741, when Handel was writing the <title>Messiah</title> in London.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
More worthy of record is the fact that the King gave up his concert for that evening and invited Bach, already known as <q>Old Bach,</q> to try the Silbermann pianofortes<note place="foot">
<p>
Gottfried Silbermann, a pioneer of the modern pianoforte.  Bach was already familiar with his Claviers with hammer action, and indeed had offered useful criticism of which Silbermann had taken advantage. See Spitta, ii. 46.
</p>
</note>
 which stood in various parts of the Palace.<note place="foot">
<p>
* The pianofortes manufactured by Silbermann, of Freiberg, pleased the King so much, that he resolved to buy them all.  He collected fifteen.  I hear that they all now stand, unfit for use, in various corners of the Royal Palace.  [Robert Eitner, in 1873, found one of the pianos in Frederick the Great's room at Potsdam.]
</p>
</note>
 Accompanied from room to room by the King and the musicians, Bach tried the instruments and improvised upon them before his illustrious companion.  After some time he asked the King to give him a subject for a Fugue, that he might treat it extempore.  The King did so, and expressed his astonishment at Bach's profound skill in developing it.  Anxious to see to what lengths the art could be carried, the King desired Bach to improvise a six-part Fugue.  But as every subject is not suitable for polyphonic
<pb n="26" />
treatment, Bach himself chose a theme and, to the astonishment of all who were present, developed it with the skill and distinction he had shown in treating the King's subject.  His Majesty expressed a wish to hear him on the Organ also. Accordingly, next day, Bach inspected all the Organs in Potsdam,<note place="foot">
<p>
According to another account, which Spitta (iii. 232) follows, Bach played before a large congregation in the Church of the Holy Spirit, Potsdam. The King does not appear to have been present. The extemporisation of the six-part Fugue took place in Frederick's presence on the evening of that day.
</p>
</note>
 as the evening before he had tried the Silbermann pianofortes. On his return to Leipzig he developed the King's theme in three and six parts, added <foreign lang="la">Canones diversi</foreign> upon it, engraved the whole under the title <title>Musikalisches Opfer</title> and dedicated it to the royal author of the theme.<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach's letter to Frederick accompanying the gift is dated 7th July 1747. He calls it <q>a musical offering, of which the noblest portion is the work of Your Majesty's illustrious hand.</q>  In addition to Forkel's analysis it contains a Sonata for Flute, Violin, and Clavier, and a canon perpetuus for the same three instruments.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
 His visit to Potsdam was Bach's last journey.  The indefatigable diligence he had shown all his life, and particularly in his younger years, when successive days and nights were given to study, seriously affected his eye-sight.  The weakness grew with age and became very distressing in character.  On the advice of friends who placed great confidence in the skill of a London oculist lately come to Leipzig,<note place="foot">
<p>
John Taylor (1703-72), oculist to George II.  The operation took place in the winter of 1749-50. Taylor is said to have operated on Handel in 1751 (see the article on him in the <title>Dict. Nat. Biography.</title>).  Streatfield (<title>Handel,</title> p. 212), however, does not mention Taylor, and his account suggests that Samuel Sharp, of Guy's Hospital, was the operator in Handel's case.
</p>
</note>
 Bach submitted to an
<pb n="27" />
operation, which twice failed.  He lost his sight completely in consequence, and his hitherto vigorous constitution was undermined by the drugs administered to him.  He sank gradually for full half a year, and expired on the evening of July 30, 1760, in the sixty-sixth year of his age.<note place="foot">
<p>
The actual date was July 28, at 8.45 P.M. Bach was working to the very moment of his collapse on July 18.  Probably his last work was the Choral Prelude (Novello bk. xvii. 85) on the melody <title>Wenn wir in h&ouml;chsten N&ouml;then sein.</title>  Facing eternity, he bade his son-in-law, Altnikol, inscribe the movement with the title of the Hymn, <title>Vor deinen Thron tret ich hiemit,</title> whose first stanza filled his mind:
</p>
<lg>
<l>Before Thy throne, my God, I stand,</l>
<l>Myself, my all, are in Thy hand.</l>
</lg>
<p>
An addendum to the Genealogy, in C. P. E. Bach's hand, gives July 30 as the date of his father's death.
</p>
</note>
 Ten days before his death<note place="foot">
<p>
July 18.
</p>
</note>
 he was suddenly able to see again and to bear the light.  A few hours later he was seized by an apoplexy and inflammatory fever, and notwithstanding all possible medical aid, his weakened frame succumbed to the attack.
</p>
<p>
Such was the career of this remarkable man.  I will only add that he was twice married, and that he had by his first wife seven, and by his second wife thirteen children; in all, eleven sons and nine daughters.<note place="foot">
<p>
See Genealogical Tables VII. and VIII.
</p>
</note>
 All of his sons had an
<pb n="28" />
admirable talent for music, but only the elder ones fully developed it.<note place="foot">
<p>
The statement is misleading.  Of the five sons of the first marriage, two were famous, two died in infancy, and the fifth abandoned a promising musical career for the law. Of the six sons of the second marriage, one was imbecile, three died in infancy, two were famous.
</p>
</note>
</p>

<figure url="images/stthomas.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Church and School of St. Thomas, Leipzig, in 1723.</head>
<figDesc>The Church and School of St. Thomas, Leipzig, in 1723.</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IIA.<note place="foot">
<p>
See Introduction, p. XXI, <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>.
</p>
</note>
BACH AT LEIPZIG, 1723-1750</head>
<pb n="28"/>
<p>
Bach was inducted into his office as Cantor of St. Thomas' School at nine o'clock on the morning of Monday, May 31, 1723.  He died in his official residence there at a quarter to nine on the evening of Tuesday, July 28, 1750.  He was buried early on the morning of Friday, July 31, in the churchyard of St. John's, Leipzig.
</p>
<p>
The announcement of his death, made from the pulpit of St. Thomas' on the day of his funeral, described him as <q>Court Composer to His Majesty the King of Poland and Electoral and Serene Highness of Saxony, Kapellmeister to His Highness the Prince of Anhalt-Cothen, and Cantor to St. Thomas' School of this town.</q>  Bach usually designated himself <q>Director Chori Musici Lipsiensis,</q> or shortly, <q>Director Musices.</q>  Circumstances led him to emphasise a title which asserted a musical prerogative not confined to the School and the churches it served.
</p>
<p>
The Cantor of St. Thomas' was charged formerly with the musical direction of four Leipzig 
<pb n="29"/>
churches: St. Thomas', St. Nicolas', St. Peter's, 
and the New Church.  He was also responsible 
for the music in the University Church of St. 
Paul, the so-called <q>old service,</q> held originally 
on the Festivals of Easter, Whit, Christmas, and 
the Reformation, and once during each University 
quarter. On high days music also had to be 
provided at St. John's Church. 
</p>
<p>
Bach, as Cantor, succeeded to a more restricted 
responsibility, which dated from the early years 
of the eighteenth century.  The New Church, 
originally the Church of the Franciscans, had been 
restored to use in 1699.  In 1704 Georg Philipp 
Telemann, who came to Leipzig as a law student 
three years before, was appointed Organist there. 
He also founded the Collegium Musicum, or University 
Musical Society, a farther slight upon the 
Cantor's position.  Not until 1729 did the Society 
pass under Bach's direction and its members 
become available as auxiliaries in the church 
choirs under his charge.  Notwithstanding that 
Bach's predecessor Kuhnau had protested against 
Telemann's independence, the direction of the 
New Church's music passed out of the Cantor's 
control, though the School continued to provide 
the choristers.  Six years later the University 
Church of St. Paul also began an independent 
course.  In 1710 the authorities resolved to hold 
a University service in the church every Sunday. 
Kuhnau asserted his prerogative as Cantor. But
<pb n="30" />
he was only able to maintain it by offering to 
provide the music for the <q>new service</q> as well 
as for the <q>old service</q> at the fee of twelve thalers 
which the University so far had paid for the 
latter.  After his death the University appointed (April 3, 1723) Johann Gottlieb G&ouml;rner, already 
Organist of St. Nicolas' since 1721, to control the 
music both of the <q>old</q> and <q>new</q> services, for 
which the University provided the choir.  Not 
until after a direct appeal to the King did Bach 
succeed, in 1726, in compelling the University to 
restore to the Cantor his emoluments in regard 
to the <q>old service,</q> the conduct of which had 
been restored to him on his appointment as 
Cantor.  The <q>new service</q> remained under 
G&ouml;rner's direction.  As to St. Peter's, its services, 
which had entirely ceased, were revived in 1711. 
The music, however, was simple, and consisted 
only of hymns.
</p>
<p>
Thus Bach, as Cantor, was responsible for the 
music in the two principal churches, St. Thomas' 
and St. Nicolas'.  The School also provided the 
choir for St. Peter's and the New Church.  The 
junior and least competent singers sang at St. 
Peter's.  The rest were pretty equally distributed 
between the other three churches.  At the New 
Church the music was performed under the direction 
of a Chorpr&auml;fect.  At St. Thomas' and St. 
Nicolas' Bach personally directed the concerted 
music.  On ordinary Sundays a Cantata or Motet
<pb n="31" />
was performed in each church alternately.  At 
the great Festivals, New Year, Epiphany, Ascension 
Day, Trinity Sunday, and the Annunciation, 
Cantatas were sung at both churches, the two 
choirs singing at Vespers in the second church 
the Cantata performed by them in the morning 
at the other church.  On these occasions the 
second choir was conducted by a Chorpr&auml;fect.  
The principal Sunday service in both churches 
began at seven in the morning, ended at eleven, 
and observed the following order:
</p>
<list>
<item>1. Organ Prelude.</item>
<item>2. Motet, related to the Gospel for the Day; (omitted in Lent and replaced by the Benedictus).</item>
<item>3. Introit.</item>
<item>4. Kyrie, sung alternately, in German and 
Latin.</item>
<item>5. The Lord's Prayer, intoned at the altar.</item>
<item>6. Gloria, intoned at the altar and answered 
either by the Choir's <foreign lang="la">Et in terra pax 
hominibus,</foreign> or by the congregation with 
the Hymn, <foreign lang="de">Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei 
Ehr,</foreign> the German version of the Gloria.</item>
<item>7. Collect, intoned in Latin; preceded by the 
preces <foreign lang="la">Dominus vobiscum</foreign> and <foreign lang="la">Et cum 
spiritu tuo.</foreign></item>
<item>8. Epistle.</item>
<item>9. Litany, in Advent and Lent only; intoned 
by four boys, the Choir responding.</item>
<pb n="33" />
<item>10. Hymn, appropriate to the Gospel.</item>
<item>11. Gospel.</item>
<item>12. Credo, intoned; (in Lent, last three Sundays 
of Advent, and Festivals of Apostles, the 
Nicene Creed, sung in Latin).</item>
<item>13. Prelude, followed by a Cantata, lasting 
about twenty minutes; on alternate 
Sundays in each church.</item>
<item>14. The Creed in German, <foreign lang="de">Wir glauben all' 
an einen Gott,</foreign> sung by the congregation.</item>
<item>15. Sermon, lasting one hour (8-9 A.M.).</item>
<item>16. Hymn, <foreign lang="de">Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns 
wend</foreign>, followed by the reading of the 
Gospel, on which the Sermon had been 
based.</item>
<item>17. General Confession, prayers, and Lord's 
Prayer.</item>
<item>18. Blessing.</item>
<item>19. Hymn.</item>
<item>20. Communion Service; Hymns and Organ 
extemporisation.</item>
<item>21. Benediction.</item>
</list>
<p>
Vespers began at a quarter past one and was a 
comparatively simple service; the music consisted 
of Hymns, a Motet, and the Magnificat. 
On the last three Sundays in Advent and 
throughout Lent neither Cantatas nor Motets were 
sung. The Organ was silent. 
On the three great Festivals the appointed 
Hymn for the season was sung at the beginning of
<pb n="34" />
the principal service, before the Organ Prelude: 
at Christmas, <foreign lang="la">Puer natus in Bethlehem</foreign>; at 
Easter, <foreign lang="de">Heut' triumphiret Gottes Sohn</foreign>; at 
Whitsuntide, <foreign lang="la">Spiritus Sancti gratia.</foreign>  During the 
Communion service the Sanctus and concerted 
music were sung.  A festal hymn followed the 
Benediction.  The three great Festivals were each 
observed for three consecutive days, on the first 
and second of which Cantatas were sung at both 
churches.  On the third day concerted music was 
sung at only one of the two churches.
</p>
<p>
The other week-day Festivals for which Cantatas 
were provided were the Feast of the Circumcision (New Year's Day), Epiphany, Ascension 
Day, Purification of the B.V.M., Annunciation of 
the B.V.M., Visitation of the B.V.M., Feast of St. 
John Baptist (Midsummer Day), Feast of St. 
Michael the Archangel. The Reformation Festival 
was kept on October 31, or if that date was a 
Saturday or Monday, on the previous or following 
Sunday.
</p>
<p>
On Good Friday the Passion was performed in 
the two principal churches alternately.  
Leipzig adopted no official Hymn-book.  The 
compilation from which the Hymns were chosen 
by Bach was the eight-volumed <foreign lang="de">Gesangbuch</foreign>
of Paul Wagner, published at Leipzig for Dresden 
use in 1697.  It contained over five thousand 
Hymns but no music, merely the name of the 
tune being stated above the Hymn.  For the
<pb n="35" />
most part the Hymns for special, and even for 
ordinary, occasions were prescribed by custom. 
Otherwise the power of selection was in the hands 
of the Cantor, and Bach's exercise of it caused 
some friction with the clergy in 1728.
</p>
<p>
The provision and direction of the music at 
weddings and funerals was in the Cantor's hands.  
He arranged the choirs and the music sung at the 
scholars' annual processions and perambulations 
of the town, which took place at Michaelmas, 
New Year, and on St. Martin's and St. Gregory's 
Days.
</p>
<p>
Augmenting the School's choristers, the Town 
Musicians took part in the Church services and 
were under the Cantor's direction. Their numbers 
and efficiency were inadequate.
</p>
<p>
Upon the staff of the School the Cantor ranked 
third after the Rector and Sub-Rector, and took 
a share in the general instruction of the scholars.  
Class III. went to Bach for Latin lessons, a duty 
which the Council eventually permitted him to 
fulfil by deputy.  Singing classes were held by 
the Cantor on three days of the week, Mondays, 
Tuesdays, and Wednesdays, at nine and noon, and 
on Fridays at noon.  His instruction in singing 
was given to the four upper classes only.  On 
Saturday afternoons the Cantata was rehearsed.  
Once in four weeks the Cantor took his turn to 
inspect the scholars.  Like the other masters, 
he was required to conform to the regulations
<pb n="36" />
of the School House, in which he lived.  He rose 
at five in summer, at six in winter, dined at ten 
and supped at five in the afternoon.
</p>
<p> 
Holidays were numerous.  A week's vacation 
was given at the Easter, Michaelmas, and New 
Year Fairs.  At Midsummer the School had a 
month of half-holidays.  Whole holidays were 
given on the birthdays of the four upper masters.  
There were no morning lessons on Saints' Days, 
on the occasion of funeral orations in the University 
Church, and on the quarterly Speech Days.  
Hence, though Bach's office carried large responsibility, 
it left him considerable leisure for composition.
</p>
<p>
As Cantor Bach had an official residence in the 
left wing of the School House.  In 1723, the 
Cantor's wing was of two storeys only, dwarfed 
by the greater elevation of the main edifice and 
under the shadow of the church.  Bach brought 
to Leipzig four children of his first marriage, 
and his second wife, Anna Magdalena, presented 
him with a son or daughter annually from 1723 
to 1729.  The accommodation of the Cantor's 
lodging therefore rapidly became inadequate.  In 
the spring of 1731 Bach found a house elsewhere 
while an additional storey was added to it, which 
provided a new music-room, a good-sized apartment 
whence a passage led to the big schoolroom 
in the main building.  The new wing was formally 
opened and dedicated on June 5, 1732, when
<pb n="37" />
Bach's secular Cantata <foreign lang="de">Froher Tag, verlangte 
Stunden</foreign> was performed; the libretto being by 
his colleague Winkler.  From thenceforward till 
his death eighteen years later Bach's occupancy 
was not disturbed.  The wing continued to be 
the official residence of the Cantor until the School 
moved to the suburbs of the city in 1877.
</p>
<p>
In addition to his residence, which he occupied 
rent free, the Cantor enjoyed a revenue from 
various and fluctuating sources, amounting in 
gross to 700 thalers (=&pound;106 per annum).  His 
fixed stipend was only 100 thalers (=&pound;15).  About 
12 thalers came to him from endowments.  In 
kind he was entitled to 16 bushels of corn and 
2 cords of firelogs, together with 2 measures of 
wine at each of the three great Festivals.  From 
the University, after his successful protest, he 
received 12 thalers for directing the <q>old service.</q> 
By far the larger part of Bach's income was 
derived from fluctuating sources.  They were 
of three kinds: (1) School monies, (2) funeral 
fees, (3) wedding fees.  The School monies represented 
perquisites derived from funds obtained 
by the scholars, partly by their weekly collections 
from the public, partly from the four annual 
processions or perambulations of the city.  From the 
weekly collections a sum of six pfennigs multiplied 
by the number of the scholars was put aside for 
the four upper masters, among whom the Cantor 
ranked third.  From the money collected at the
<pb n="38" />
New Year, Michaelmas, and St. Martin's Day 
processions the Rector took a thaler, the Cantor 
and the Sub-Rector each took one-eleventh of the 
balance, sixteen thirty-thirds went to the singers, 
and one-quarter of what remained fell to the 
Cantor.  Out of the money collected on St. 
Gregory's Day (March 12) the Rector took one-tenth for the entertainment of the four upper 
masters, and the Cantor took one-third of the 
residue.  For funerals one thaler 15 groschen 
was paid when the whole school accompanied 
the procession and a Motet was sung at the house 
of the deceased.  When no Motet was sung the 
Cantor's fee was 15 groschen. For weddings he 
received two thalers.
</p>
<p>
Reckoned in modern currency, and judged by 
the standard of the period, the Cantor's income 
was not inadequate and served to maintain 
Bach's large family in comfort.  When he died 
in 1750, in addition to a mining share valued at 
60 thalers, he possessed in cash or bonds about 
360 thalers, silver plate valued at 251 thalers, 
instruments valued at 371 thalers, house furniture 
valued at 29 thalers, and books valued at 38 
thalers.  His whole estate was declared at 1158 
thalers, or somewhat less than the savings of two 
years' income.  But for the inequitable distribution 
of his property, owing to his intestacy, which 
left Anna Magdalena only about 400 thalers and 
the mining share, Bach's widow and unmarried
<pb n="39"/>
daughters ought not to have been afflicted with 
excessive poverty, as in fact they were.
</p>
<p>
At the beginning of his Cantorate Bach worked 
amid discouraging and unsatisfactory conditions.  
The Rector, Johann Heinrich Ernesti, was over 
seventy years of age in 1723.  The School was 
badly managed, its discipline was relaxed, the 
better-to-do citizens withheld their sons from it, 
and its numbers were seriously diminished.  In 
1717 the junior classes contained only 53 as 
against 120 in Ernesti's earlier years.  The 
proximity and operatic traditions of Dresden 
and Weissenfels also had a bad effect; the St. 
Thomas' boys, after attaining musical proficiency, 
were apt to become restless, demanding release 
from their indentures, and even running away to 
more attractive and lucrative occupations.  Moreover, 
the governors of the School were the Town 
Council, a body which had little sympathy with 
or appreciation of Bach's artistic aims and temperament.  
To these difficulties must be added 
another.  The Town Musicians, on whom Bach 
relied for the nucleus of his orchestra, were few 
in number and inefficient.
</p>
<p>
So long as Ernesti lived, there was little prospect 
of reform.  But, after his death, in October 1729, 
Bach made vigorous representations to the Town 
Council.  Already he had remonstrated with the 
Council for presenting to foundation scholarships 
boys who lacked musical aptitude.  The Council
<pb n="40" />
retaliated by accusing Bach of neglecting his 
singing classes, absenting himself without leave, 
and of other irregularities.  He was declared to 
be <q>incorrigible</q> and it was resolved (August 2, 
1730) to sequestrate the Cantor's income, in 
other words, to withhold from him the perquisites 
to which he was entitled for the conduct of the 
Church services.<note place="foot">
<p>
In view of Bach's memorial of August 23, 1730 <foreign lang="la">(infra)</foreign>, this seems to be  the meaning of the resolution.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach was not deterred from offering, three 
weeks later (August 23, 1730), a <q>sketch of what 
constitutes well-appointed Church music, with a 
few impartial reflections on its present state of 
decay</q> in Leipzig.  The document reveals the 
conditions amid which Bach worked.  Its representations 
may be summarised:
</p>
<p>
The foundation scholars of St. Thomas' are of 
four classes: Trebles, Altos, Tenors, Basses. 
</p>
<p>
A choir needs from four to eight <q>concertists</q> (
solo singers) and at least two <q>ripienists</q> to each 
chorus part, <foreign lang="la">i.e.</foreign> a minimum of twelve voices.
</p>
<p>
The foundation scholars number fifty-five, by whom the choirs of the four Churches, St. Thomas', St. Nicolas', St. Peter's, and the New Church are provided.  For the instrumental accompaniments at least twenty players are required: viz., 2 or 3 first Violins, 2 or 3 second Violins, 4 Violas, 2 Violoncelli, 1 Contrabasso, 2 or more Flutes, 2 or 3 Oboi,
<pb n="41" />
1 or 2 Fagotti, 3 Trombe, 1 Timpani.  To fill 
these places there are eight Town Musicians, and 
at the moment there are no players available for 
third Tromba, Timpani, Viola, Violoncello, Contrabasso, third Oboe (or Taille).
</p>
<p>
To augment the Town Musicians the Cantor has 
been wont in the past to employ University 
students and instrumental players in the School.  
Upon the former <q>at all times</q> he relies for Viola, 
Violoncello, and Contrabasso, and <q>generally</q> for 
the second Violins.  But the Council, by its recent 
resolution, no longer affords the Cantor the means 
to employ them.  To place the scholars in the 
orchestra weakens the choir, to which they naturally 
belong.
</p>
<p>
By presenting to foundation scholarships boys 
unskilled and ignorant of music, the resources at 
the Cantor's disposal are still farther lessened.
</p>
<p> 
Hence, Bach concludes, <q>in ceasing to receive 
my perquisites I am deprived of the power of 
putting the music into a better condition.</q>
</p>
<p> 
No answer was made to Bach's memorial, and 
he contemplated resigning his position.  But with 
the advent of Johann Matthias Gesner as Rector 
in September 1730 a happier period dawned upon 
the <q>incorrigible</q> Cantor.  In 1732 Gesner procured 
the withdrawal of the Council's ban on 
Bach's perquisites.  The fallen fortunes of the 
School revived, and Bach did not again make an 
effort to leave Leipzig.  In 1736 the grant of the
<pb n="42" />
post of Hof-Componist to the Saxon Court gave 
him at length a title which compelled the deference 
of his civic masters.
</p>
<p>
Bach's early misunderstanding with the University 
cut him off from association with the most 
dignified, if not the most important, institution 
in Leipzig, and deprived him of opportunity to 
display his genius beyond the radius of his Church 
duties.  The situation changed in 1729, when he 
became director of the University Society, and he 
held the post for about ten years.  The Society 
gave weekly concerts on Fridays, from 8 to 10, 
and an extra concert, during the Fair season, on 
Thursdays at the same hour.  It performed vocal 
and instrumental music and was the medium 
through which Bach presented his secular Cantatas, 
Clavier and Violin Concertos, and Orchestral 
Suites to the public.  The proficiency of his elder 
sons and pupils, and his wife's talent as a singer, 
were a farther source of strength to the Society, 
whose direction undoubtedly made these years the 
happiest in Bach's life.  He took his rightful place 
in the musical life of the city, and relegated to a 
position of inferiority the smaller fry, such as 
G&ouml;rner, who had presumed on Bach's aloofness 
from the University and Municipality to insinuate 
themselves.  His increasing reputation as an 
organist, gained in his annual autumn tours, also 
enlightened his fellow-townsmen regarding the 
superlative worth of one whom at the outset
<pb n="43" />
they were disposed to treat as a subordinate 
official.
</p>
<p>
The Leipzig of Bach's day offered various opportunities 
for musical celebration; official events in 
the University, <q>gratulations</q> or <q>ovations</q> of 
favourite professors by their students, as well as 
patriotic occasions in which town and gown participated.  
The recognised fee for <foreign lang="fr">piec&egrave;s d'occasion</foreign> 
of a public character was fifty thalers.  Bach's 
conductorship of the University Society enabled 
him to perform festival works with the resources 
they required, and to augment the band and 
chorus needed for their adequate performance.
</p>
<p>
Even before he undertook the direction of the 
University Society, Bach more than once provided 
the music for University celebrations.  On 
August 3, 1725, his secular Cantata, <title>Der
zufried-engestellte Aeolus,</title> was performed at the students' 
celebration of Doctor August Friedrich M&uuml;ller's 
name-day.  In 1726 he revived an old Cantata<note place="foot">
<p>
<title>Steigt freudig in die Luft,</title> first performed at C&ouml;then, set to a new text, <title>Schwingt freudig euch empor.</title>
</p>
</note>
to celebrate the birthday of another of the Leipzig 
teachers.  In the same year the appointment of 
Dr. Gottlieb Kortte as Professor of Roman Law 
was celebrated by Bach's Cantata <title>Vereinigte 
Zwietracht der wechselnden Saiten.</title> In 1733 the 
birthday of another Professor was marked by the 
performance of the C&ouml;then Cantata to yet another 
text (<title>Die Freude reget sich</title>). On November 21, 
<pb n="44" />
1734, the lost Cantata <title>Thomana sass annoch 
betr&uuml;bt</title> was sung at the induction of Gesner's 
successor, Johann August Ernesti, as Rector of 
St. Thomas' School.
</p>
<p>
But Bach's activity as a secular composer at 
Leipzig was chiefly expended on patriotic celebrations.  
His compositions of this character are 
particularly numerous during the years 1733-36, 
while he was seeking from the Dresden Court the 
post of Hof-Componist.  The first of these celebrations 
took place on May 12, 1727, the birthday 
of Augustus II. of Poland-Saxony, when 
Bach's Cantata, <title>Entfernet euch, ihr heitern 
Sterne,</title> was performed in the Market Place by 
the University Society.  The King was present 
and listened to the performance from a convenient 
window.  The music is lost.  Six years elapsed 
before Bach was invited to collaborate in 
another celebration of the royal House.  On 
September 5, 1733, less than two months after his 
application for the post of Hof-Componist, the 
University Society celebrated the eleventh birthday 
of the Electoral Prince by performing Bach's 
<foreign lang="la">dramma per musica</foreign>, <title>Die Wahl des Herkules,</title> or  
<title>Herkules auf dem Scheidewege.</title> Barely three 
months later, on December 8, 1733, Bach produced 
another Cantata in honour of the royal 
family, <title>T&ouml;net, ihr Pauken, erschallet Trompeten,</title> 
of which he was both author and composer.  On 
no less than three occasions in 1734 Bach did
<pb n="45" />
homage to his unheeding sovereign.  In January 
the University Society, under Bach's direction, 
performed his Cantata <title>Blast Larmen, ihr Feinde</title> 
to celebrate the coronation of Augustus III.  The 
music had already done duty in Dr. M&uuml;ller's 
honour in 1725.  On the following October 5, 
1734, when the King visited Leipzig, Bach's 
hurriedly written Cantata, <title>Preise dein Gl&uuml;cke, 
gesegnetes Sachsen,</title> whose first chorus became the <foreign lang="la"> 
Osanna</foreign> of the B minor Mass, was performed in 
the Market Place.  Two days later, on October 7, 
1734, the King's birthday was celebrated by 
another Bach Cantata, <title>Schleicht spielende 
Wellen,</title> performed by the Collegium Musicum.  
In 1738, having received the coveted title of Hof-Componist in the interval (1736), Bach performed 
a work&mdash;<title>Willkommen, ihr herrschenden G&ouml;tter 
der Erden</title>&mdash;now lost, in honour of the marriage 
of the Princess Maria Amalia of Saxony to Charles 
of Sicily, afterwards Charles III. of Spain.
</p>
<p>
Apart from his musical activities and the house 
in which he lived there is little that permits us 
to picture Bach's life at Leipzig.  Association 
with his friends Johann Christian Hoffmann, 
Musical Instrument Maker to the Court, Marianne 
von Ziegler, J. C. Gottsched and his musical wife, 
Johann Abraham Birnbaum, among the Professoriate, 
Picander and Christian Weiss, Bach's 
regular librettists, suggests the amenities of an 
academic and literary circle. But the claims of
<pb n="46" />
his art and the care of his large family had the 
first call upon Bach's interest.  And few men had 
a happier home life.  While his elder sons were 
at home the family concerts were among his most 
agreeable experiences.  As his fame increased, 
his house became the resort of many seeking to 
know and hear the famous organist.  Late in the 
thirties he resigned his directorship of the University 
Society.  His sons were already off his 
hands and out of his house, and he turned again 
to the Organ works of his Weimar period.  Their 
revision occupied the last decade of his life, and the 
hitherto constant flow of Church Cantatas ceased.  
Pupils resorted to him and filled his empty house, 
to one of whom, Altnikol, he gave a daughter in 
marriage.
</p>
<p>
A man of rigid uprightness, sincerely religious; 
steeped in his art, earnest and grave, yet not 
lacking naive humour; ever hospitable and 
generous, and yet shrewd and cautious; pugnacious 
when his art was slighted or his rights 
were infringed; generous in the extreme to his 
wife and children, and eager to give the latter 
advantages which he had never known himself; 
a lover of sound theology, and of a piety as deep 
as it was unpretentious&mdash;such were the qualities 
of one who towers above all other masters of music 
in moral grandeur.
</p>
<p>
Four, perhaps only three, contemporary 
portraits of Bach are known.  One is in the
<pb n="47" />
possession of the firm of Peters at Leipzig and 
once belonged to Carl Philipp Emmanuel's 
daughter, who with inherited impiety sold it to 
a Leipzig flute player.  The second hung in 
St. Thomas' School and is reproduced at p. 48 
of this volume.  It was painted in 1746 and 
restored in 1913.  Both portraits are by Elias 
Gottlieb Haussmann, Court Painter at Dresden.  
The third portrait belonged to Bach's last pupil, 
Kittel, and used to hang on the Organ at Erfurt, 
whence it disappeared after 1809, during the 
Napoleonic wars.  Recently Professor Fritz 
Volbach of Mainz has discovered a fourth portrait, 
which is printed at p. 92 of the present volume.  
He supposes it to be none other than the Erfurt 
portrait, as indeed it well may be, since it represents 
a man of some sixty years, austere in 
countenance, but of a dignity that is not so 
apparent in Haussmann's portraiture.<note place="foot">
<p>
The well-known portrait by C. F. Rr. Liszewski in the Joachimsthal 
Gymnasium, Berlin, was painted in 1772, twenty-two years after 
Bach's death.  It represents him at a table with music-paper before 
him and an adjacent Clavier.  Pirro uses for his frontispiece a portrait 
by Geber, which bears no resemblance whatever to the Haussmann or 
Volbach pictures.  Mention must also be made of a singularly engaging 
picture of Bach at the age of thirty-five.  It hangs in the Eisenach 
Bach Museum and is by Johann Jak. Ihle.  It is reproduced as the 
frontispiece of this volume.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach left no will.  In consequence his widow, 
Anna Magdalena, burdened with the charge of 
a step-daughter and two daughters, was entitled 
to only one-third of her husband's estate.  Neither
<pb n="48" />
Carl Philipp Emmanuel nor Wilhelm Friedemann was her own 
child.  But the fact cannot 
excuse gross neglect of their father's widow.  
Her own sons were in a position to make such a 
contribution to her income as would at least have 
kept want from her door.  In fact she was permitted 
to become dependent on public charity, 
and died, an alms-woman, on February 27, 1760, 
nearly ten years after her great husband.  The 
three daughters survived her.  One died in 1774, 
the second in 1781.  The third, Regine Susanna, 
survived them, her want relieved by gifts from 
a public that at last was awakening to the 
grandeur of her father.  Beethoven contributed 
generously.  Regine Susanna died in December 
1809, the last of Bach's children.  In 1845 her 
nephew, Johann Christoph Friedrich's son, also 
died.  With him the line of Johann Sebastian 
Bach expired.
</p>

<figure url="images/bach2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Johann Sebastian Bach, circa 1746. <emph>From the picture by Haussmann.</emph></head>
<figDesc>Johann Sebastian Bach, circa 1746. From the picture by Haussmann.</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<pb n="49" />

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER III. BACH AS A CLAVIER PLAYER</head>
<p>
As a Clavier player Bach was admired by all who 
had the good fortune to hear him and was the 
envy of the virtuosi of his day.  His method 
greatly differed from that of his contemporaries 
and predecessors, but so far no one has attempted 
to explain in what the difference consisted.  
The same piece of music played by ten different 
performers equally intelligent and competent 
will produce a different effect in each 
case.  Each player will emphasise this or that 
detail.  This or that note will stand out with 
differing emphasis, and the general effect will 
vary consequently.  And yet, if all the players 
are equally competent, ought not their performances 
to be uniform?  The fact that they 
are not so is due to difference of touch, a quality 
which to the Clavier stands as enunciation to 
human speech.  Distinctness is essential for the 
enunciation of vowels and consonants, and not less 
so for the articulation of a musical phrase.  But 
there are gradations of distinctness.  If a sound 
is emitted indistinctly it is comprehensible only
<pb n="50" />
with effort, which occasions us to lose much of 
the pleasure we should otherwise experience.  
On the other hand, over-emphasis of words or 
notes is to be avoided.  Otherwise the hearer's 
attention will be diverted from the <foreign lang="fr">tout ensemble</foreign>.  
To permit the general effect to be appreciated 
every note and every vowel must be sounded 
with balanced distinctness.
</p>
<p>
I have often wondered why Carl Philipp 
Emmanuel Bach's <title>Essay on the Right Manner 
of playing the Clavier</title><note place="foot">
<p>
His <title>Versuch &uuml;ber die wahre Art des Klavier zu spielen</title> was published (Part I.) in 1753.
</p>
</note>
does not elucidate the 
qualities that constitute a good touch.  For he 
possessed in high degree the technique that made 
his father pre-eminent as a player.  True, in his 
chapter on <q>Style in Performance,</q> he writes,
<q>Some persons play as if their fingers were glued 
together; their touch is so deliberate, and they 
keep the keys down too long; while others, 
attempting to avoid this defect, play too crisply, 
as if the keys burnt their fingers.  The right 
method lies between the two extremes.</q> But 
it would have been more useful had he told us 
how to reach this middle path.  As he has not 
done so, I must try to make the matter as clear 
as is possible in words.
</p>
<p>
Bach placed his hand on the finger-board so 
that his fingers were bent and their extremities 
poised perpendicularly over the keys in a plane
<pb n="51" />
parallel to them.<note place="foot">
<p> Forkel's meaning 
can be made clear in the following manner: 
place the thumb and fingers of either hand upon the notes C D E F G 
of the pianoforte so that the three middle fingers lie more or less flat 
upon the keys; then draw back the three middle fingers until they 
form an arch having their tips approximately in a straight line with 
the tips of the thumb and little finger upon the keys.
</p>
</note>
Consequently none of his 
fingers was remote from the note it was intended to 
strike, and was ready instantly to execute every 
command.  Observe the consequences of this 
position.  First of all, the fingers cannot <emph>fall</emph> 
or (as so often happens) be <emph>thrown</emph> upon the notes, 
but are <emph>placed</emph> upon them in full control of the 
force they may be called on to exert.  In the 
second place, since the force communicated to the 
note needs to be maintained with uniform pressure, 
the finger should not be released perpendicularly 
from the key, but can be withdrawn gently and 
gradually towards the palm of the hand.  In 
the third place, when passing from one note 
to another, a sliding action instinctively instructs 
the next finger regarding the amount of force 
exerted by its predecessor, so that the tone is 
equally regulated and the notes are equally 
distinct.  In other words, the touch is neither 
too long nor too short, as Carl Philipp Emmanuel 
complains, but is just what it ought to 
be.<note place="foot">
<p>
It must be remembered that Forkel is speaking of the Clavier 
and not of the Pianoforte.
</p>
</note>
Many advantages arise from holding the hand 
in Bach's position and from adopting his touch,
<pb n="52" />
on the Clavichord and Harpsichord,<note place="foot">
<p>
The Harpsichord, as its 
name implies, was an instrument whose 
strings were plucked by a plectrum. Bach preferred the older Clavier, 
or Clavichord, which could be regulated, as the other could not, by 
nicety of touch. See note, p. 68, <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>.
</p>
</note>
and on  the Organ as well.  I point out merely the most 
important of them.   To begin with, if the fingers 
are bent, their movements are free.  The notes 
are struck without effort and with less risk of 
missing or hitting too hard, a frequent fault with 
people who play with their fingers elongated or 
insufficiently bent.  In the second place, the 
sliding finger-tip, and the consequently rapid 
transmission of regulated force from one finger to 
another, tend to bring out each note clearly and 
to make every passage sound uniformly brilliant 
and distinct to the hearer without exertion.  In 
the third place, stroking the note with uniform 
pressure permits the string to vibrate freely, improves 
and prolongs the tone, and though the 
Clavichord is poor in quality, allows the player 
to sustain long notes upon it.  And the method 
has this advantage: it prevents over-expenditure 
of strength and excessive movement of the hand.  
We gather that the action of Bach's fingers was 
so slight as to be barely perceptible.  Only the 
top joint seemed to move.  His hand preserved 
its rounded shape even in the most intricate 
passages.  His fingers rested closely upon the 
keys, very much in the position required for a 
<q>shake.</q>  An unemployed finger remained in a
<pb n="53" />
position of repose.  It is hardly necessary to say that
that other limbs of his body took no part in his 
performance, as is the case with many whose 
hands lack the requisite agility.<note place="foot">
<p>
Schweitzer (i. 208) points out that Bach's touch 
was modern, in 
that he realised that <q>singing tone</q> depends not only upon the manner 
in which the keys are struck, but, to a great extent, on the regulation 
of their ascent.
</p>
<p>
Of Handel's touch, Burney writes (quoted by Rockstro, p. 349): 
<q>His touch was so smooth, and the tone of the instrument so much 
cherished, that his fingers seemed to grow to the keys.  They were 
so curved and compact when he played, that no motion, and scarcely 
the fingers themselves, could be discovered.</q>
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
A man may possess all these qualities, however, 
and remain an indifferent performer on the 
Clavier, just as clear and agreeable enunciation 
does not necessarily make a good speaker.  To be 
a first-rate performer many other qualities are 
needed, and Bach possessed them all in a notable 
degree.
</p>
<p>
Some fingers are longer and stronger than others. 
Hence players are frequently seduced to use the 
stronger whenever they can readily do so.  Consequently 
successive notes become unequal in tone, 
and passages which leave no choice as to the finger 
to be used may become impossible to play.  Bach 
recognised this fact very early in his career.  To 
get over the difficulty he invented exercises for 
his own use in which the fingers of both hands 
were made to practise passages in every conceivable 
position.  By this means every finger on 
both hands equally became strong and serviceable,
<pb n="54" />
 so that he could play a rapid succession of 
chords, single and double <q>shakes,</q> and running 
passages with the utmost finish and delicacy, and 
was equally fluent in passages where some fingers 
play a <q>shake</q> while the others on the same hand 
continue the melody.
</p>
<p>
Besides these improvements, Bach invented a 
new system of fingering.<note place="foot">
<p>
At the beginning of the seventeenth century, 
as Spitta points out (ii. 34), the art of fingering had not developed.  Speaking generally, 
neither thumb nor little finger was employed.  It was not until the 
beginning of the eighteenth century that a scientific method emerged, 
a development rendered necessary by the advance in the modes of 
musical expression.  C. P. E. Bach, quoted by Schweitzer (i. 206), 
puts this concisely: <q>My late father told me that in his youth he had 
heard great men who never used the thumb except when it was necessary 
to make big stretches.  But he lived in an epoch when there 
came about gradually a most remarkable change in musical taste, 
and therefore found it necessary to work out for himself a much more 
thorough use of the fingers, and especially of the thumb, which, besides 
performing other good services, is quite indispensable in the difficult 
keys, where it must be used as nature intends.</q>
</p>
</note>
 Before his time, and 
even in his early years, it was usual for the player 
to pay attention to harmony rather than counterpoint. 
Even so it was not customary to use 
every one of the twenty-four major and minor 
keys.  The Clavichord was still what we term
<q><foreign lang="de">gebunden</foreign></q>; that is, several keys struck the 
same string, which, therefore, could not be 
accurately tuned.<note place="foot">
<p>
According to Mr. Arnold Dolmetsch, Clavichords with special 
strings for each note (<foreign lang="de">bundfrei</foreign>) were known in Bach's time.
</p>
</note>
 Consequently it was usual to 
employ only those keys whose notes were tuned 
with some approximation to accuracy.  Again,
<pb n="56" />
good players in those days hardly ever used the thumb, 
except when a large interval had to be 
stretched.  But when Bach began to melodise 
harmony so that his middle parts not merely 
filled in but had a tune of their own, when, 
too, he began to deviate from the Church modes 
then in general vogue in secular music, using the 
diatonic and chromatic scales indifferently, and 
tuning the Clavier in all the twenty-four keys, he 
found himself compelled to introduce a system of 
fingering better adapted to his innovations than 
that in use, and in particular, to challenge the 
convention which condemned the thumb to inactivity. 
It is held by some writers that Couperin 
forestalled Bach's method of fingering, in his
<title>L'Art de toucher le Clavecin,</title> published in 
1716.  But that is not the case.  In the first 
place, Bach was above thirty years old in 1716, 
and had already developed a distinctive method 
of his own.  And in the second place, Couperin's 
system differs materially from Bach's, though both 
made more frequent use of the thumb than was 
so far customary.  When I say <q>more frequent 
use</q> I do so advisedly; for whereas in Bach's 
system the thumb is the principal finger&mdash;for the 
difficult keys, as they are called, are unplayable 
without it&mdash;it is not equally indispensable with 
Couperin, whose thematic material was not so 
intricate as Bach's, nor did he compose or play 
in such difficult keys.  Consequently Couperin
<pb n="56" />
had not an equally urgent need to use the thumb.  
We need only compare Couperin's with Bach's 
system of fingering, as Carl Philipp Emmanuel 
explains it,<note place="foot">
<p>
In the <title>Essay</title> already referred to.  For 
a discussion of Couperin's 
method see Spitta, ii. 37 ff. 
</p>
</note>
 to discover that Bach's permits every 
passage, however intricate and polyphonic, to be 
played with ease, whereas Couperin's is hardly 
effective even for his own compositions.  Bach 
was acquainted with Couperin's works and highly 
esteemed them,<note place="foot">
<p>
For instance, the Rondeau in B flat in Anna Magdalena's <title>Noten- 
buch</title> (No. 6) (1725) is by Couperin.
</p>
</note>
 as he did those of other French 
Clavier composers, for their finish and brilliance.  
But he considered them affected in their excessive 
use of ornaments, scarcely a single note being free 
from them.  He held them, also, superficial in 
matter.
</p>
<p>
Bach's easy, unconstrained use of the fingers, 
his musical touch, the clearness and precision of 
every note he struck, the resourcefulness of his 
fingering, his thorough training of every finger 
of both hands, the luxuriance of his thematic 
material and his original method of stating it, all 
contributed to give him almost unlimited power 
over his instrument, so easily did he surmount 
the difficulties of its keyboard.  Whether he improvised 
or played his compositions from notes, 
he systematically employed every finger of each 
hand, and his fingering was as uncommon as the 
compositions themselves, yet so accurate that he 
<pb n="57" />
never missed a note.  Moreover, he read at sight 
other people's compositions (which, to be sure, 
were much easier than his own) with the utmost 
facility.  Indeed, he once boasted to a friend at 
Weimar that he could play at sight and without a 
mistake anything put before him.  But he was 
mistaken, as his friend convinced him before the 
week was out.  Having invited Bach to breakfast 
one morning, he placed on the Clavier, among 
other music, a piece which, at a first glance, seemed 
perfectly easy.  On his arrival, Bach, as was his 
custom, sat down at the Clavier to play or look 
through the music.  Meanwhile his friend was in 
the next room preparing breakfast.  In a short 
time Bach took up the piece of music destined to 
change his opinion and began to play it.  He had 
not proceeded far before he came to a passage at 
which he stopped.  After a look at it he began 
again, only to stop at the same place. <q>No,</q> he 
called out to his friend, who was laughing heartily 
in the next room, <q>the man does not exist who 
can play everything at sight.  It can't be done.</q>
With that he got up from the Clavier in some 
annoyance.<note place="foot">
<p>
No doubt the friend who prepared this trap for Bach 
was Johann Gottfried Walther.  His compositions frequently were characterised 
by intricacy.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach also could read scores with remarkable 
facility and play them on the Clavier. He 
found no more difficulty in piecing together the
<pb n="58" />
separate parts when laid side by side before him.<note place="foot">
<p>
Mozart had the 
same gift.  When visiting St. Thomas' School 
in 1789, he heard with astonishment a performance of Bach's Motet, <title>
Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied.</title> <q>At the conclusion he expressed 
his delight, and said, <q>Now that is something from which a man may 
learn.</q>  On being informed that Bach was Cantor to this school, and 
that his Motets were venerated there as reliques, he was eager to see 
them.  No score being to be obtained, they handed him the separate 
parts, and it was interesting to observe his manner of reading them, 
holding some in his hands, some on his knees, placing some on chairs 
around him; seeming thoroughly lost to everything, and not rising till 
he had thoroughly satisfied his curiosity</q> (Holmes, <title>Life of Mozart,</title> ed. Dent, p. 251). 
</p>
</note>
He often did so when a friend brought him a new 
Trio or Quartet for Strings and wished to hear 
how it sounded.  If a Continuo part, however 
badly figured, was put before him he could improvise 
a Trio or Quartet upon it.  Nay, when 
he was in the mood and at the height of his 
powers, he would convert a Trio into a Quartet 
by extemporising a fourth part.  On such occasions 
he used a Harpsichord with two manuals and 
pedal attachment.
</p>
<p>
Bach preferred the Clavichord to the Harpsichord, 
which, though susceptible of great variety 
of tone, seemed to him lacking in soul.  The 
Pianoforte was still in its infancy and too coarse.<note place="foot">
<p>
There were in Bach's time three <q>Clavier</q> instruments in use.  
The oldest, the Clavichord, as a rule, had two strings to every 
note, set in motion by a <q>tangent</q> striking them from below.  Its 
advantage was that it permitted the tone to be regulated by the 
touch.  For that reason, though its tone was weak, Bach preferred 
it.  The Clavicembalo, or Harpsichord, as it is called in the text, was 
in general known as the <q>Fl&uuml;gel,</q> the strings being plucked, or flipped 
by a quill or metal pin, after the manner of the modern mandoline. 
The third instrument was the <q>piano e forte,</q> or Hammerclavier.
The Clavicembalo was also built with two keyboards, like an Organ, 
and a pedal-board provided with strings.  It was for this instrument 
that the so-called Organ Sonatas of Bach were written.  He possessed 
five Clavicembali, but not a single Clavichord at the time of his death.  
For that reason it has been questioned whether Forkel is accurate in 
stating that Bach preferred the latter instrument. See Schweitzer, 
i. 200 ff.
</p>
</note>
<pb n="59" />
Both for practice and intimate use he regarded 
the Clavichord as the best instrument and preferred 
to express on it his finest thoughts.  He held 
the Harpsichord, or Clavicembalo, incapable of the 
gradations of tone obtainable on the Clavichord, 
an instrument which, though feeble in quality, is 
extremely flexible.
</p>
<p>
No one could adjust the quill plectrums of his 
Harpsichord to Bach's satisfaction; he always 
did it himself.  He tuned his Harpsichord and 
Clavichord, and was so skilful in the operation 
that it never took him more than a quarter of an 
hour.  It enabled him to play in any key he 
preferred, and placed the whole twenty-four of 
them at his disposal, so that he could modulate 
into the remoter as easily and naturally as into 
the more nearly related keys.  Those who heard 
him frequently could hardly detect the fact that 
he had modulated into a distant key, so smooth 
were his transitions.  In chromatic movements 
his modulation was as easy and sequent as in 
diatonic.  His <title>Chromatic Fantasia,</title> which is 
now published,<note place="foot">
<p>
 Peters bk. 207 p. 4.
</p>
</note>
 bears out my statement.  In 
his extemporisation he was even freer, more 
brilliant and expressive. 
</p>
<pb n="60" />
<p>
When he played his own music Bach usually 
adopted a brisk pace.  He contrived to introduce 
so much variety that every piece became a sort 
of conversation between its parts.  If he wished 
to express deep emotion he did not strike the notes 
with great force, as many do, but expressed his 
feeling in simple melodic and harmonic figures,<note place="foot">
<p>
The truth of this remark is 
very evident in the <title>Orgelb&uuml;chlein.</title>
</p>
</note>
relying rather on the internal resources of his art 
than external dynamics.  Therein he was right.  
True emotion is not suggested by hammering 
the Clavier. All that results is that the notes 
cannot be heard distinctly, much less be connected 
coherently. 
</p>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IV.  BACH THE ORGANIST</head>
<p>
What has been said regarding Bach's admirable 
Clavier playing applies generally to his skill as 
an organist.  The Clavier and Organ have points 
in common, but in style and touch are as different 
as their respective uses.  What sounds well on 
the Clavier is ineffective on the Organ, and vice 
versa.  The most accomplished Clavier player 
may be, and usually is, a bad organist unless he 
realises the differing natures of the two instruments 
and the uses they serve.  I have come across 
only two men who can be regarded as exceptions 
to this general rule&mdash;Bach and his eldest son, 
Wilhelm Friedemann.  Both were finished Clavier 
performers, but no trace of the Clavier style was 
apparent when they played the Organ.  Melody, 
harmony, and pace were carefully selected with 
due regard to the nature and distinctive use of 
each instrument.  When Wilhelm Friedemann 
played the Clavier his touch was elegant, delicate, 
agreeable.  When he played the Organ he inspired 
a feeling of reverent awe. On the one he was
<pb n="62" />
charming.  On the other he was solemn, impressive.  
So also was his father, and to an even 
greater degree.  Wilhelm Friedemann was a mere 
child to him as an organist, and frankly admitted 
the fact.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel writes as though he were in a position by personal 
knowledge to compare the gifts of Bach and his son.  In fact 
he was born in 1749 and was less than two years old when 
Bach died.
</p>
</note>
 The music that extraordinary man 
wrote for the Organ is full of dignity, awe-inspiring, 
saturated with the atmosphere of devotion.  His 
improvisation was even more inspired, dignified, 
and impressive: for then his imagination was 
untrammelled by the irksomeness of expressing 
himself on paper.  What is the essence of this 
art? Let me, though imperfectly, attempt an 
answer.
</p>
<p>
When we compare Bach's Clavier compositions 
with those written for the Organ it is at once 
apparent that they differ essentially in melodic 
and harmonic structure.  Hence we conclude 
that a good organist must select fitting themes for 
his instrument, and let himself be guided by its 
character and that of the place in which it stands 
and by the objects of its use.  Its great body of 
tone renders the Organ ill-adapted to light and 
jaunty music.  Its echoes must have liberty to 
rise and fall in the dim spaces of the church, 
otherwise the sound becomes confused, blurred, 
and unintelligible.  What is played upon it
<pb n="63" />
must be suited to the place and the instrument, 
in other words, must be congruous to 
a solemn and majestic fabric.  Occasionally 
and exceptionally a solo stop may be used 
in a Trio, etc.  But the proper function of 
the Organ is to support church singing and 
to stimulate devotional feeling.  The composer 
therefore must not write music for it which 
is congruous to secular surroundings.  What is 
commonplace and trite can neither impress the 
hearer nor excite devotional feeling.  It must 
therefore be banished from the Organ-loft. How 
clearly Bach grasped that fact!  Even his secular 
music disdained trivialities.  Much more so his 
Organ music, in which he seems to soar as a spirit 
above this mortal planet.
</p>
<p>
Of the means by which Bach attained to such 
an altitude as a composer for the Organ we may 
notice his harmonic treatment of the old Church 
modes, his use of the obbligato pedal, and his 
original registration.  The remoteness of the 
ecclesiastical modes from our twenty-four major 
and minor keys renders them particularly appropriate 
to the service of religion.  Any one who 
looks at Bach's simple four-part Hymn tunes (<foreign lang="de">Choralges&auml;nge</foreign>) will at once convince himself of 
the fact.  But no one can realise how the Organ 
sounds under a similar system of harmonic 
treatment unless he has heard it.  It becomes 
a choir of four or five parts, each in its natural
<pb n="64" />
compass.  Compare the following chords in 
divided harmony:
</p>

<figure url="images/harmony1.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w30">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Divided Harmony, Bach treatment</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
with these:
</p>

<figure url="images/harmony2.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w30">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Divided Harmony, conventional treatment</figDesc>
</figure>

<p>
which is the more usual form organists employ.  
We realise instantly the effect when music in four 
or more parts is played in the same manner.  
Bach always played the Organ so, adding the 
obbligato pedal, which few organists know how 
to use properly.  He employed it not only to 
sound the low notes which organists usually play 
with the left hand, but he gave it a regular 
part of its own, often so complicated that many 
organists would find it difficult to play with their 
five fingers.
</p>
<p>
To these qualities must be added the exquisite 
art Bach displayed in combining the stops of the 
Organ.  His registration frequently astonished 
organists and Organ builders, who ridiculed it at 
first, but were obliged in the end to admit its
<pb n="65" />
admirable results and to confess that the Organ 
gained in richness and sonority.<note place="foot">
<p>
On Bach's use of the stops see Spitta, i. 394 ff., and Pirro's <title>L'Orgue 
de J.-S. Bach.</title>
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach's peculiar registration was based on his 
intimate knowledge of Organ building and of the 
properties of each individual stop.  Very early in 
his career he made a point of giving to each part 
of the Organ the utterance best suited to its 
qualities, and this led him to seek unusual combinations 
of stops which otherwise would not have 
occurred to him.  Nothing escaped his notice 
which had the slightest bearing on his art or promised 
to advance it.  For instance, he made a 
point of observing the effect of large musical 
compositions in different surroundings.  The practised 
ear, which enabled him to detect the slightest 
error in music even of the fullest and richest 
texture, and the art and rapidity with which he 
tuned his instrument, alike attest his intuitive 
skill and many-sidedness.  When he was at Berlin 
in 1747 he was shown the new Opera House.  He 
took in its good and bad qualities at a glance, 
whereas others had done so only after experience.  
He was shown the large adjoining Saloon and 
went up into the gallery that runs round it.  
Merely glancing at the roof he remarked, <q>The 
architect has secured a novel effect which, probably, 
neither himself nor any one else suspected.</q>  
The Saloon, in fact, is a parallelogram. If a 
<pb n="66" />
person puts his face to the wall in one corner of 
it and whispers a few words, another person at 
the corner diagonally opposite can hear them 
distinctly, though to others between them the 
words are inaudible.  The effect arises from the 
span of the arches in the roof, as Bach saw at a 
glance.  These and similar observations suggested 
to him striking and unusual combinations of 
Organ stops.
</p>
<p> 
Bach brought the methods I have indicated to 
bear upon Church music, and they help to explain 
his extraordinarily dignified and inspired playing, 
which was at once so appropriate and filled the 
listener with deep awe and admiration.  His profound 
knowledge of harmony, unfailing originality, 
freedom from a secular style, his complete command 
of the instrument, both manuals and 
pedals, whence flowed a generous stream of the 
richest and most abundant fancy, the infallible 
and swift judgment which allowed him always to 
select from the treasury of his mind precisely the 
musical ideas best suited to the occasion immediately 
before him, his intuitive grasp of every 
detail, and his power to make it serve his artistic 
ends&mdash;in a word, his transcendent genius brought 
the art of Organ playing to a degree of perfection 
which, till then, it had never attained and hardly 
will attain again.  Quantz<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Joachim Quantz, b. 1697; flute player and composer; 
taught Frederick the Great the flute; settled at Berlin as Kammer-musikus and Court Composer; d. 1773.
</p>
</note>
has expressed the 
<pb n="67" />
same opinion. <q>The admirable Johann Sebastian 
Bach,</q> he writes, <q>brought the art of Organ playing 
to its highest perfection.  It is to be hoped that 
when he dies it will not be suffered to decline or 
be lost, as is to be feared from the small number 
of people who nowadays bestow pains upon it.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
The <title>Nekrolog</title> 
sums up more briefly than Forkel, in a judgment 
which, without doubt, is the very truth: <q>Bach was the greatest 
Organ player that had yet been known.</q>
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Strangers often asked Bach to play to them 
between the hours of divine service.  On those 
occasions he was wont to select and treat a theme 
in various ways, making it the subject of each 
extemporisation even if he continued playing for 
two hours.  As a beginning he played a Prelude and 
Fugue on the Great Organ.  Then he developed it 
with solo stops in a Trio or Quartet.  A Hymn-tune followed, whose melody he interrupted in 
the subtlest fashion with fragments of the theme 
in three or four parts.  Last came a Fugue, with full 
Organ, in which he treated the subject alone or 
in association with one or more accessory themes.  
Here we have the art which old Reinken of Hamburg 
considered to be lost, but which, as he 
afterwards found, not only survived but attained 
its greatest perfection in Bach.
</p>
<p>
Bach's pre-eminent position and his high reputation 
often caused him to be invited to examine 
candidates for vacant organistships, and to report 
on new Organs.  In both cases he acted so conscientiously 
and impartially that he generally made 
<pb n="68" />
enemies.  Scheibe, late Director of Music at the 
Danish Court, who as a young man was examined 
by Bach on such an occasion, was so incensed 
by Bach's unfavourable verdict that he afterwards 
avenged himself in his <q>Critical Musician</q> 
by violently attacking his examiner.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Adolph Scheibe, 
a native of Leipzig, was an unsuccessful 
candidate for the Organistship of St. Thomas' Church in 1729.  Bach 
was one of the judges.  In 1737 Scheibe published in the <q>Kritische 
Musikus</q> a criticism of Bach which, while doing justice to his powers 
as an organist, characterised his compositions as <q>turgid and confused 
in character.</q>  Bach was incensed by the criticism and asked his 
friend, Professor Birnbaum of Leipzig, to answer it.  Scheibe replied 
in 1739, with a wholly unjustified challenge of Bach's general education 
and culture. In his <q>Phoebus and Pan,</q> performed in 1731, Bach 
had already had the satisfaction of representing Scheibe as <q>Midas</q> 
and calling him an ass.  On the whole matter see Schweitzer, i. 178 ff. 
and Spitta, iii. 252.  Scheibe conducted the Court orchestra at Copenhagen 
from 1742-49 and died there in 1776.
</p>
</note>
 In his 
examination of Organs Bach equally exposed 
himself to trouble.  He could as little prevail on 
himself to praise a bad instrument as to recommend 
a bad organist.  He was, therefore, severe, 
though always fair, in the tests he applied, and as 
he was thoroughly acquainted with the construction 
of the instrument it was hopeless to attempt 
to deceive him.  First of all he drew out all the 
stops, to hear the Full Organ.  He used to say 
jokingly, that he wanted to find out whether the 
instrument had good lungs!  Then he gave every 
part of it a most searching test.  But his sense 
of fairness was so strong that, if he found the work 
really well done, and the builder's remuneration
<pb n="69" />
too small, so that he was likely to be a loser, 
Bach endeavoured, and often successfully, to 
procure for him an adequate addition to the 
purchase price.
</p>
<p>
When the examination was over, especially if 
the instrument pleased him, Bach liked to exhibit 
his splendid talent, both for his own pleasure and 
the gratification of those who were present.  Such 
demonstrations of his powers invariably invited 
the verdict, that he was conclusively <q>the prince 
of Clavier and Organ players,</q> a title which Sorge, 
the late highly-esteemed organist at Lobenstein,<note place="foot">
<p>
Georg Andreas Sorge, <q>Court and Town Organist to the Count of 
Reuss and Plau at Lobenstein,</q> in his dedication thus commended 
Bach: <q>The great musical virtue that Your Excellency possesses is 
embellished with the excellent virtue of affability and unfeigned love 
of your neighbour.</q> See Schweitzer, i. 155.
</p>
</note>
once gave him in a dedicatory Preface.
</p>
</div>

<pb n="70" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER V. BACH THE COMPOSER</head>
<p>
Bach's first attempts at composition, like all 
early efforts, were unsatisfactory.  Lacking special 
instruction to direct him towards his goal, he was 
compelled to do what he could in his own way, 
like others who have set out upon a career without 
a guide.  Most youthful composers let their 
fingers run riot up and down the keyboard, snatching 
handfuls of notes, assaulting the instrument 
in wild frenzy, in hope that something may result 
from it.  Such people are merely Finger Composers&mdash;in his riper years Bach used to call them 
Harpsichord Knights&mdash;that is to say, their fingers 
tell them what to write instead of being instructed 
by the brain what to play.<note place="foot">
<p>
The following 
passage from the Autobiography of Hector Berlioz (ed. Dent, p. 11) is relevant: <q>My father would never let me learn the 
piano; if he had, no doubt I should have joined the noble army of 
piano thumpers&hellip;Sometimes I regret my ignorance, yet, when 
I think of the ghastly heap of platitudes for which that unfortunate 
piano is made the daily excuse&mdash;insipid, shameless productions, that 
would be impossible if their perpetrators had to rely, as they ought, 
on pencil and paper alone&mdash;then I thank the fates for having forced 
me to compose silently and freely by saving me from the tyranny of 
finger-work, that grave of original thought.</q>
</p>
</note>
 Bach abandoned that 
method of composition when he observed that
<pb n="71" />
brilliant flourishes lead nowhere.  He realised that 
musical ideas need to be subordinated to a plan 
and that the young composer's first need is a 
model to instruct his efforts.  Opportunely 
Vivaldi's Concertos for the Violin,<note place="foot">
<p>
Antonio Vivaldi, A. 1743; 
a master of form.  That fact turned 
the attention of German composers to him; while the popularity of 
his Violin Concertos also attracted musicians, like Bach, whose work 
at C&ouml;then was in close association with the Court Kapelle or 
band. 
</p>
</note>
 then recently 
published, gave him the guidance he needed.  He 
had often heard them praised as admirable works 
of art, and conceived the happy idea of arranging 
them for the Clavier.<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach re-wrote sixteen Vivaldi Violin Concertos for the Clavier, 
four of them for the Organ, and developed one into a Concerto for four 
Claviers and a quartet of strings which Forkel enumerates (
<foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, p. 132) 
as a composition of Bach's (Peters bk. 260). Bach learnt from Vivaldi 
<q>clearness and plasticity of musical structure.</q> See article <title>Vivaldi</title> 
in Grove; Spitta, i. 411 ff; Schweitzer, i. 192 ff.  The Vivaldi Clavier 
Concertos are in Peters bk. 217; the Organ Concertos in Novello 
bk. 11. Not all these transcriptions are based on Vivaldi. See 
Schweitzer, i. 193.
</p>
</note>
 Hence he was led to study 
their structure, the musical ideas on which they 
are built, the variety of their modulations, and 
other characteristics.  Moreover, in adapting to 
the Clavier ideas and phrases originally written 
for the Violin Bach was compelled to put his 
brain to work, and so freed his inspiration from 
dependence on his fingers.  Henceforth he was 
able to draw ideas out of his own storehouse, and 
having placed himself on the right road, needed 
only perseverance and hard work to succeed.  
And how persevering he was!  He even robbed
<pb n="72" />
himself of sleep to practise in the night what he 
had written during the day!  But the diligence 
he bestowed upon his own compositions did not 
hinder him from studying the works of Frescobaldi,<note place="foot">
<p>
Girolamo Frescobaldi, b. 1583, d. 1644; Organist of St. Peter's, 
Rome. 
</p>
</note> Froberger, Kerl, Pachelbel, Fischer, 
Strungk,<note place="foot">
<p>
Delphin Strungk, b. 1601, d. 1694; Organist of St. Martin's, 
Brunswick; composed for the Organ. 
</p>
</note> Buxtehude, Reinken, Bruhns, B&ouml;hm, 
and certain French organists who were famed in 
those days as masters of harmony and fugue.<note place="foot">
<p>
Purcell should be added to those whom Forkel mentions as Bach's 
models. See <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, p. 261.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
The models he selected&mdash;Church musicians for 
the most part&mdash;and his own disposition inclined 
him to serious and exalted subjects.  But in that 
kind of music little can be accomplished with 
inadequate technique.  Bach's first object, therefore, 
was to develop his power of expressing himself 
before he attempted to realise the ideal that 
beckoned him.  Music to him was a language, and 
the composer a poet who, whatever the idiom he 
affects, must first of all have at his disposal the 
means of making himself intelligible to others.  
But the technique of his period Bach found limited 
in variety and insufficiently pliable.  Therefore 
he set himself at the outset to refashion the 
accepted harmonic system.  He did so in a 
manner characteristically individual and bearing 
the impress of his personality.
</p>
<pb n="73" />
<p>
If the language of music is merely the utterance 
of a melodic line, a simple sequence of musical 
notes, it can justly be accused of poverty.  The 
addition of a Bass puts it upon a harmonic foundation 
and clarifies it, but defines rather than gives 
it added richness.  A melody so accompanied&mdash;even though all the notes are not those of the 
true Bass&mdash;or treated with simple embellishments 
in the upper parts, or with simple chords, used to 
be called <q>homophony.</q>  But it is a very different 
thing when two melodies are so interwoven that 
they converse together like two persons upon a 
footing of pleasant equality.  In the first case 
the accompaniment is subordinate, and serves 
merely to support the first or principal part.  In 
the second case the two parts are not similarly 
related.  New melodic combinations spring 
from their interweaving, out of which new 
forms of musical expression emerge.  If more 
parts are interwoven in the same free and independent 
manner, the apparatus of language is 
correspondingly enlarged, and becomes practically 
inexhaustible if, in addition, varieties of form 
and rhythm are introduced.  Hence harmony 
becomes no longer a mere accompaniment of 
melody, but rather a potent agency for augmenting 
the richness and expressiveness of musical 
conversation.  To serve that end a simple accompaniment 
will not suffice.  True harmony is 
the interweaving of several melodies, which
<pb n="74" />
emerge now in the upper, now in the middle, 
and now in the lower parts.
</p>
<p>
From about the year 1720, when he was thirty-five, until his death in 1750, Bach's harmony 
consists in this melodic interweaving of independent 
melodies, so perfect in their union that 
each part seems to constitute the true melody.  
Herein Bach excels all the composers in the world.<note place="foot">
<p>
* See Kirnberger's <q>Kunst des reinen Satzes,</q> p. 157. [The work 
was published in two volumes at Berlin in 1771, 1776.]
</p>
</note> 
At least, I have found no one to equal him in 
music known to me.  Even in his four-part 
writing we can, not infrequently, leave out the 
upper and lower parts and still find the middle 
parts melodious and agreeable.
</p>
<p>
But in harmony of this kind each part must be 
highly plastic; otherwise it cannot play its role 
as an actual melody and at the same time combine 
with the other parts.  To produce it Bach 
followed a course of his own, upon which the textbooks 
of his day were silent, but which his genius 
suggested to him.  Its originality consists in the 
freedom of his part writing, in which he transgresses, 
seemingly, at any rate, rules long established 
and to his contemporaries almost sacred.  
Bach, however, realised their object, which was 
simply to facilitate the flow of pure melody 
on a sound harmonic basis, in other words, 
successive and coexistent euphony, and he succeeded 
with singular success though by
<pb n="75" />
unfamiliar means.  Let me explain my meaning 
more closely.
</p>
<p>
Between simple intervals there is little difficulty 
in deciding whether the second note must 
rise or fall.  And in regard to phrases, or sections 
of a phrase, if we analyse their structure and 
follow out their harmonic tendency, their resolution 
is equally clear.  But this sense of destination 
may be provoked in each part by different 
intervals.  As we have observed already, every 
one of the four parts must flow melodically and 
freely.  But to secure that result it will be necessary 
to introduce between the notes which begin 
a phrase and establish its general atmosphere 
other notes which often are not consonant with 
those employed in the other parts and whose 
incidence is governed by the accent.  This is what 
we call a <foreign lang="la">transitus regularis et irregularis</foreign>.<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Transitus regularis</foreign>=
a passing note on the unaccented portions of 
the bar; <foreign lang="la">transitut irregularis</foreign>=a
passing note on the accented part of the bar.
</p>
</note>
 Each 
part starts from a fixed point, and returns to it, 
but travels freely between them.  No one has 
made more use of such progressions than Bach 
in order to colour his parts and give them a characteristic 
melodic line.  Hence, unless his music 
is played with perfect fluency, occasional passages 
will sound harshly and we may be tempted to 
accuse him of exaggeration.  But the charge is 
ill founded. Once we play them as Bach intended 
<pb n="76 " />
them, such passages reveal their full beauty and 
their attractive though bizarre dissonance opens 
up new vistas in the realm of sound.
</p>
<p>
But, to speak in detail of Bach's transgression 
of recognised rules.  To begin with, he admitted 
octaves and fifths provided they sounded well; 
that is, when the cause of their being forbidden 
did not arise.<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta (iii. 315 ff. ) prints 
a treatise by Bach, <title>Rules and Instructions 
for playing Thorough-bass or Accompaniment in Four Parts,</title> dated 1738. 
Rule 3 of chap. vi. states: <q>Two fifths or two octaves must not occur 
next one another, for this is not only a fault, but it sounds wrong.  To 
avoid this there is an old rule, that the hands must always go against 
one another, so that when the left goes up the right must go down, 
and when the right goes up the left must go down.</q>
</p>
</note> Everybody knows that there are 
positions in which they sound well, and others 
when they should be avoided, owing to the harsh 
effect or thin harmony they produce.  Bach's 
octaves and fifths never produce bad or thin 
harmony, and he was very definite as to when 
they could and could not be used.  In certain 
circumstances he would not permit hidden fifths 
and octaves even between the middle parts, 
though we exclude them only between the outer 
parts.  Yet, on occasion he used them in such a 
barefaced manner as to puzzle the beginner in 
composition.  But their use very soon commends 
itself.  Even in the last revision of his early compositions 
we find him altering passages, which at 
first sight appear impeccable, with the object of 
enriching their harmony and without scrupling to 
use hidden octaves.  A remarkable instance occurs
<pb n="77" />
in the first part of the <title>Well-tempered Clavier,</title> 
in the E major Fugue, between the fifth and fourth 
bars from the end.<note place="foot">
<p>
Actually the third beat of the fourth bar from the end. P. bk. 1 
p. 37 Fugue no. 9.
</p>
</note> I regret to this hour that, 
on looking over the later text, from which Hoffmeister and K&uuml;hnel's edition of that work is 
printed,<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel edited the <title>Wohltemperirte Clavier</title> for Hoffmeister in 
1801.
</p>
</note> I was so foolish as to reject Bach's 
amended reading there, merely because the harmony 
is unorthodox though more pleasing.  I 
stupidly preferred the older, more correct, and 
harsher reading, though in the later text the 
three parts run easily and smoothly. And what 
more can one demand? 
</p>
<p>
Again, there is a rule that every note raised 
by an accidental cannot be doubled in the chord, 
because the raised note must, from its nature, 
resolve on the note above.  If it is doubled, it 
must rise doubled in both parts and, consequently, 
form consecutive octaves.  Such is the 
rule.  But Bach frequently doubles not only notes 
accidentally raised elsewhere in the scale but 
actually the <foreign lang="la">semitonium modi</foreign> or leading-note 
itself.  Yet he avoids consecutive octaves.  His 
finest works yield examples of this.
</p>
<p>
Again, Bach's statement that <q>over a pedal 
point all intervals are permissible that occur in 
the three scales</q><note place="foot">
<p>
The rule is not in the <title>Rules and Instructions</title> already referred to.
</p>
</note>
 should be regarded rather
<pb n="78" />
an expansion than a violation of the recognised 
rule.  In general what is called an Organ point is 
merely a retarded close.  Bach, however, did not 
hesitate to employ it in the middle of a piece; a 
striking example occurs in the last Gigue of the 
<title>English Suites.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Suite No. 6, in D minor (P. bk. 204 p. 84).
</p>
</note>
 On a first hearing this Gigue, 
imperfectly rendered, may not sound well.  But 
it grows more beautiful as it becomes more 
familiar, and what seemed harsh is found to be 
smooth and agreeable, until one never tires of 
playing and hearing it.
</p>
<p>
Bach's modulation was as original and characteristic 
as his harmony, and as closely related to 
it.  But the two things, though closely associated, 
are not the same.  By harmony we mean the 
concordance of several parts; by modulation, their 
progression through keys.  Modulation can take 
place in a single part.  Harmony requires more than 
one.  I will endeavour to make my meaning clearer.
</p>
<p> 
Most composers stick closely to their tonic key 
and modulate out of it with deliberation.  In 
music that requires a large number of performers, 
and in a building, for instance a church, where 
the large volume of sound dies away slowly, such 
a habit shows good sense in the composer who 
wishes his work to produce the best possible 
effect.  But in chamber or instrumental music 
it is not always a proof of wisdom, but rather of 
mental poverty. Bach saw clearly that the two 
<pb n="79" />
styles demand different treatment.  In his large
choral compositions he bridles his exuberant 
fancy.  In his instrumental works he lets himself 
go.  As he never courted popularity, but always 
pursued his ideal, Bach had no reason to suppress 
the nobility of his inspirations, or to lower their 
standard for public consumption.  Nor did he 
ever do so.  Therefore every modulation in his 
instrumental work is a new thought, a constantly 
progressive creation in the plane of the chosen 
keys and those related to them.  He holds fast 
to the essentials of harmony, but with every 
modulation introduces a new suggestion and 
glides so smoothly to the end of a piece that no 
creaking of machinery is perceptible; yet no 
single bar&mdash;I might almost say no part of a bar&mdash;is
like another.  Every modulation bears a strict 
relationship to the key from which it proceeds, 
and springs naturally from it.  Bach ignored, or 
rather despised, the sudden sallies by which many 
composers seek to surprise their hearers.  Even 
in his chromatic passages his progressions are 
so smooth and easy that we are hardly conscious 
of them, however extreme they may be.  He 
makes us feel that he has not stepped outside the 
diatonic scale, so quick is he to seize upon the 
consonances common to dissonant systems and 
combine them to his sure purpose.
</p>

<figure url="images/statue1.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Bach Statue at Eisenach</head>
<figDesc>The Bach Statue at Eisenach</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VI. BACH THE COMPOSER (continued)</head>
<pb n="80" />
<p>
Bach's treatment of harmony and modulation 
powerfully influenced his melody.  The strands 
of his harmony are really concurrent melodies.  
They flow easily and expressively, never engross 
the hearer's attention, but divide his interest, 
as now one now the other becomes prominent.  
Even when they are noticeable they seem obscured 
by the melodic parts that accompany them&mdash;I 
say <q>seem obscured,</q> for if the hearer is sufficiently 
instructed to distinguish the several melodies in 
the ensemble he will discover them to be more 
clearly defined by their accompaniment.
</p>
<p>
The combination of several melodic lines obliges 
the composer to use devices which are unnecessary 
in homophonic music.  A single melody can 
develop as it pleases.  But when two or more are 
combined each must be so delicately and cleverly 
fashioned that it can be interwoven with the 
others in this direction and in that.  And here 
we detect one at least of the reasons why Bach's 
melodies are so strangely original, and his tunes 
so clearly distinguishable from those of other
<pb n="81" />
composers.  Provided that novelty does not degenerate 
into eccentricity or extravagance, and 
that clearness and facility of expression march 
with agreeableness, a composer's meritoriousness
is proclaimed in his originality.<note place="foot">
<p>
* Many people hold the opinion that the best melody is one which 
the largest number of persons can understand and sing.  But this 
cannot be admitted, for if it were true, popular airs which are sung 
up and down the country by all classes, even the lowest, must be 
accounted the finest and best.  I should be inclined to state the proposition 
conversely: a melody which attracts everybody is invariably 
of the most ordinary kind.  In that form the statement might, perhaps, 
pass as a principle. 
</p>
</note>
 The one 
drawback is that the ordinary hearer cannot 
appreciate melodic beauties which are patent 
only to the expert.
</p>
<p>
But Bach's melodies are not invariably so handicapped.  
They are always original, it is true.  
But in his free compositions the melodies are so 
natural and spontaneous that, while they sound 
differently from those of other composers, their 
naturalness, and the sincerity of feeling that 
inspires them, make them intelligible to every 
listener.  Most of the Preludes in the <title>Well-tempered Clavier</title> as well as a number of movements 
in the Suites are of this character.
</p>
<p>
Bach's melody, then, bears the unmistakable 
stamp of originality.  And so does his passage 
work, as it is called.  Such novelty, originality, 
and brilliancy are not found in any other composer.  
Examples are to be found in all Bach's Clavier 
works. But the most striking and original are in
<pb n="82" />
the <title>Great Variations,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel alludes to the <title>Goldberg Variations</title> (P. bk. 209).
</p>
</note> in the first Part of the 
<title>Clavier&uuml;bung,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
P. bks. 205, 206.
</p>
</note> in the <title>English Suites,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
P. bks. 203, 204.
</p>
</note> and 
the <title>Chromatic Fantasia.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
P. bk. 207.
</p>
</note> In the last particularly 
Bach's fertility impresses us.  The greater 
part of its passage work is in the form of harmonic 
arpeggios whose richness and originality match 
the chords they represent.
</p>
<p>
In order to realise the care and skill Bach 
expended on his melody and harmony, and how 
he put the very best of his genius into his work, 
I need only instance his efforts to construct 
a composition incapable of being harmonised 
with another melodic part.  In his day it was 
regarded as imperative to perfect the harmonic 
structure of part-writing.  Consequently the composer 
was careful to complete his chords and 
leave no door open for another part.  So far 
the rule had been followed more or less closely in 
music for two, three, and four parts, and Bach 
observed it in such cases.  But he applied it also 
to compositions consisting of a single part, and to 
a deliberate experiment in this form we owe 
the six Violin and the six Violoncello Solo Suites,<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach wrote three Suites (Partita) and three Sonatas for Solo 
Violin.  They date from about 1720 and are in the keys of G minor, 
B minor, A minor, D minor, C major, and E major (P. bk. 228).  The 
six Violoncello Suites date from the same period and are in G major, 
D minor, C major, E flat major, C minor, and D major (P. bks. 238a, 
238b).
</p>
</note> 
<pb n="83" />
which have no accompaniment and do not require 
one.  So remarkable is Bach's skill that the solo 
instrument actually produces all the notes required 
for complete harmony, rendering a second part 
unnecessary and even impossible.
</p>
<p>
Bach's melody never palls on us, because of the 
presence in it of those qualities to which I have 
referred.  It remains <q>ever fair and young,</q>
like Nature herself.  In his earlier works, in which 
we find him still in bondage to the prevailing 
mode, there is a good deal that to-day seems 
antiquated.  But when, as in his later works, 
he draws his melody from the living wells of 
inspiration and cuts himself adrift from convention, 
all is as fresh and new as if it had been written 
yesterday.  Of how many compositions of that 
period can the same be said?  Even the works 
of ingenious composers like Reinhard Keiser<note place="foot">
<p>
Reinhard Keiser, b. 1673, d. 1739; scholar of the Leipzig Thomas-schule; settled at Hamburg, 1694; composed a number of Operas, and for a time had a great vogue.
</p>
</note> 
and Handel have become old-fashioned sooner 
than we or their composers might have supposed.  
Like other caterers for the public, they were 
obliged to pander to its taste, and such music 
endures no longer than the standard which 
produced it.  Nothing is more inconstant and 
fickle than popular caprice and, in general, what 
is called fashion.  It must be admitted, however, 
that Handel's Fugues are not yet out of date,
<pb n="84" />
though there are probably few of his Arias that 
we now find agreeable.<note place="foot">
<p>
It was precisely his agreeable operatic Arias that expressed 
Handel's genius in the eyes of his generation.  With rare exceptions 
that branch of his work is obsolete and his cult survives mainly in 
the <title>Messiah,</title> which supports his quite posthumous reputation as
<q>musician in ordinary to the Protestant religion.</q> See Mr. R. A. 
Streatfield's <title>Handel,</title> Introduction.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach's melody and harmony are rendered still 
more distinctive by their inexhaustible rhythmic 
variety.  Hitherto we have discussed his music 
merely subjectively as harmony and melody.  But 
to display vivacity and variety music needs to be 
uttered with rhythmic point and vigour.  More 
than those of any other period composers of Bach's 
time found no difficulty in this, for they acquired 
facility in the management of rhythm in the
<q>Suite,</q> which held the place of our <q>Sonata.</q> 
Between the initial Prelude and closing Gigue the 
Suite includes a number of characteristic French 
dance measures, whose rhythm is their distinguishing 
characteristic.  Composers of Bach's day, 
therefore, were familiar with measures and 
rhythms which are now obsolete.  Moreover skilful 
treatment was necessary in order that each dance 
might exhibit its own distinctive character and 
swing.  Herein Bach exceeded his predecessors 
and contemporaries.  He experimented with every 
kind of key and rhythm in order to give variety 
and colour to each movement.  Out of his experience 
he acquired such facility that, even in
<pb n="85" />
Fugue, with its complex interweaving of several 
parts, he was able to employ a rhythm as easy 
as it was striking, as characteristic as it was sustained 
from beginning to end, as natural as a 
simple Minuet.
</p>
<p>
The source of Bach's astonishing pre-eminence 
is to be sought in his facile and constant application 
of the methods we have discussed.  In whatever 
form he chose to express himself, easy or 
difficult, he was successful and seemingly effortless.<note place="foot">
<p>
Schweitzer advances the opinion, which 
may perhaps be challenged, 
that inevitable and natural as Bach's melodies are, they do not give 
the impression of <q>effortless invention.</q>  Bach, he holds, worked like 
a mathematician, who sees the whole of a problem at once, and has 
only to realise it in definite values.  Hence, he agrees with Spitta, 
Bach's way of working was quite different from Beethoven's.  With 
Beethoven the work developed by means of episodes that are independent 
of the theme.  With Bach everything springs with mathematical 
certainty from the theme itself. See Schweitzer (i. 211) on 
Bach's methods of working. 
</p>
</note>
There is not a note in his music that does 
not suggest consummate ease of workmanship. 
What he sets out to do he concludes triumphantly.  
The result is complete and perfect; no one could 
wish for a single note to be other than it is.  Some 
illustrations will make my point clearer.
</p>
<p>
Carl Philipp Emmanuel, in the preface to his 
father's <title>Vierstimmige Choralges&auml;nge</title>
(<q>Four-part Hymn-tunes</q>), which he edited,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Sebastian Bach's <title>Vierstimmige Choralges&auml;nge</title> 
were published in 1765 and 1769.  C. P. E. Bach was concerned only with the 
first volume.  Forkel perhaps refers to an edition of the <title>Choralges&auml;nge </title> 
issued by Breitkopf in four parts at Leipzig in 1784, 1785, 
1786, and 1787, and edited by C. P. E. Bach.
</p>
</note> says that 
<pb n="86" />
the world was accustomed to look for nothing but 
masterpieces from Bach.  Some reviewers thought 
this praise exaggerated.  But if the term <q>masterpiece</q> 
is restricted to works written during the 
years of Bach's maturity<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel indicates the period 1720-1750.  But in 1720 Bach had 
already completed the <title>Orgelb&uuml;chlein</title> and the greater part of his 
Organ works.
</p>
</note>
 it is nothing less than 
the truth.  Others have produced masterpieces 
in various forms which may be placed honourably 
by the side of his.  For instance, certain Allemandes, Courantes, etc., by Handel and others are 
not less beautiful, though less richly wrought, than 
Bach's.  But in Fugue, Counterpoint, and Canon 
he stands alone, in a grandeur so isolated that 
all around him seems desert and void.  No one 
ever wrote Fugues to compare with his; indeed, 
persons unacquainted with them cannot imagine 
what a Fugue is and ought to be.  The ordinary 
Fugue follows a rule of thumb development.  It 
takes a theme, puts another beside it, passes 
them into related keys, and writes other parts 
round them over a Continuo.  Certainly this is 
Fugue: but of what merit?  Persons who know 
no other not unnaturally hold the whole species 
in little esteem, and the player who hopes to make 
such commonplace material convincing will need 
all his skill and imagination.
</p>
<p>
Bach's Fugue is of quite another kind.  It presents 
all the characteristics we are accustomed to 
<pb n="87" />
in freer musical forms: a flowing and distinctive 
melody, ease, clarity, and facility in the progression 
of the parts, inexhaustible variety of 
modulation, purest harmony, the exclusion of 
every jarring or unnecessary note, unity of form 
and variety of style, rhythm, and measure, and 
such superabundant animation that the hearer 
may well ask himself whether every note is not 
actually alive.  Such are the properties of Bach's 
Fugues, properties which excite the admiration 
and astonishment of all who can appreciate the 
intellectual calibre their composition demands.  
How great a tribute of homage is due to work of 
this kind, which exhibits all the qualities which 
lend distinction to compositions in other musical 
forms!  Moreover, while all Bach's Fugues of his 
mature period have the foregoing properties in 
common, each is endowed with peculiar excellencies 
of its own, has its own distinctive individuality, 
and displays a melodic and harmonic 
scheme in keeping with it.  The man who can 
play one of Bach's Fugues is familiar with, and can 
play, one only; whereas knowing one, we can 
perform portfolios of Fugues by other performers 
of Bach's period.
</p>
<p> 
To what a height was the art of Counterpoint 
carried by Bach's genius!  It enabled him to 
develop out of a given subject a whole family of 
related and contrasted themes, of every form and 
design.  It taught him to develop an idea logically
<pb n="88" />
from the beginning to the end.  It gave him such 
a command of harmony and its infinite combinations 
that he could invert whole themes, note by 
note, in every part, without impairing in the least 
the flow of melody or purity of his harmony.  It 
taught him to write in canon at all intervals and 
in movements of all kinds so easily and naturally 
that the workmanship is not perceptible and the 
composition sounds as smoothly as though it were 
in the free style. Lastly, it has given to posterity 
a legacy of works immensely various, which are, 
and will remain, models of contrapuntal form as 
long as music endures.<note place="foot">
<p>
* There are people who conclude that Bach merely perfected harmony.  
But if we realise what harmony is, a means to extend and emphasise 
musical expression, we cannot imagine it apart from melody.  And 
when, as in Bach's case, harmony is actually an association of melodies, 
such a view becomes the more ridiculous.  It might perhaps be reasonable 
to say of a composer that his influence was restricted to the 
sphere of melody, because we may get melody without harmony.  But 
there cannot be real harmony without melody.  Hence the composer 
who has perfected harmony has influenced the whole, whereas the 
melodist has left his mark only on a fraction of his art. 
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
I have written exclusively so far of Bach's 
Clavier and Organ work.  But in its expression 
music has two branches, instrumental and vocal, 
and as Bach excels in both of them, the reader 
will desire to hear somewhat respecting his vocal 
writings.
</p>
<p>
It was at Weimar that Bach first had occasion 
to write for the voice,<note place="foot">
<p>
As has been pointed out already
(<foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, 
p. 14) Bach's earliest 
church Cantatas date from the Arnstadt period.
</p>
</note> upon his appointment to
<pb n="89" />
the Kapelle, which imposed on him the provision 
of music for the ducal chapel.  His church music, 
like his Organ works, is devout and serious, and 
in every respect what church music ought to be.  
He makes a point also of not elaborating individual 
words, which leads to mere trifling, but interprets 
the text as a whole.<note place="foot">
<p>
The statement certainly needs 
a caveat.  No composer of his 
period studied his text more closely or reverently than Bach.  No 
one, on the other hand, was more readily fired by a particular word 
or image in his text to give it sometimes irrelevant expression.
</p>
</note> His choruses invariably are 
magnificent and impressive, and he frequently 
introduces Chorals into them,<note place="foot">
<p>
Of Bach's church Cantatas 206 have survived.  In only 22 of them 
does Bach fail to introduce movements based upon the Lutheran 
Chorals. 
</p>
</note>
 making the other 
parts accompany their <foreign lang="la">Cantus</foreign> fugally, as was the 
practice in a Motet.  As elsewhere in his works, 
the harmonic structure of his voice parts and 
instrumental accompaniment is rich.  The declamation 
of the recitatives is expressive, and the 
latter have fine Continuo parts.<note place="foot">
<p>
We must attribute to Forkel's general ignorance of Bach's concerted 
church music his failure to comment upon a much more remarkable 
feature of the recitatives, namely, their unique treatment of the 
human voice as a declamatory medium, a development as remarkable 
as Wagner's innovations in operatic form a century later.
</p>
</note> In his Arias, 
hardly one of which is not beautiful and expressive, 
Bach seems to have been handicapped by 
the inefficiency of his singers and instrumentalists, 
who constantly complained of the difficulty of his 
music.  If he had been fortunate enough to have 
capable performers the merits of his church music
<pb n="90" />
would have been established and, like his other 
works, they would still be sung and admired; for 
they contain treasures which deserve immortality.<note place="foot">
<p>
It was not the imperfections of the choir but the indifference of 
Bach's successors at St. Thomas', Leipzig, that was chiefly responsible 
for the neglect of his Cantatas in the latter half of the eighteenth 
century.  Johann Friedrich Doles (1716-89) was the only Cantor who 
realised the greatness of his predecessor's concerted church music. 
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p> 
Among the works composed at Leipzig I single 
out two Cantatas, one of which was performed at 
C&ouml;then at the funeral of Bach's beloved Prince 
Leopold, and the other in St. Paul's Church, 
Leipzig, on the occasion of the funeral sermon in 
honour of Christiana Eberhardine, Queen of 
Poland and Electress of Saxony.<note place="foot">
<p>
The <title>Trauer-Ode</title>
was performed on October 17, 1727.  Bach 
finished the score two days before the performance!  A parallel case 
is that of Mozart, who finished the overture of <title>Don Giovanni</title> on the 
morning of the first performance of the Opera, and actually played 
it unrehearsed that evening. 
</p>
</note> The first 
contains double choruses of uncommon magnificence 
and most affecting sentiment.<note place="foot">
<p>
It has been pointed out already that Bach used the <title>St. Matthew 
Passion</title> music, set to other words, for the occasion. No. 26 (<q>I would 
beside my Lord be watching</q>) was sung to the words <q>Go, Leopold, 
to thy rest</q>! 
</p>
</note> The second 
has only four-part choruses, but they are so delightful 
and fresh that he who begins the work 
will not pause till he has reached the end of it. 
It was written in October 1727.
</p>
<p>
Bach also composed a great number of Cantatas, 
chiefly for the choir of St. Thomas' School, Leipzig.<note place="foot">
<p>
Of the 206 surviving Cantatas, 172 were written for the Leipzig 
choir.
</p>
</note>
<pb n="91" />
The choir ordinarily numbered fifty singers, and
sometimes more, over whose musical training 
Bach presided like a father.  He practised them 
so hard in Cantatas for single and double chorus 
that they became excellent singers.  Among these 
works are some which, in profundity of conception, 
magnificence, richness of harmony and melody, 
and animation, surpass everything of their kind.  
But, like all Bach's works, and in common with 
other masterpieces, they are difficult to perform 
and need a numerous orchestra to produce their 
full effect.
</p>
<p>
Such are Bach's most important vocal compositions.
<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's knowledge is very incomplete. 
</p>
</note> In minor forms of the art, <foreign lang="fr">morceaux </foreign>
for social entertainments and the like, he wrote 
little,<note place="foot">
<p>
Elsewhere Forkel mentions only one of the secular Cantatas. 
</p>
</note> though he was of a most sociable disposition. 
For instance, he is said never to have 
composed a song.<note place="foot">
<p>
There is a tradition that Bach wrote a comic song, <title>Ihr Sch&ouml;nen, 
h&ouml;ret an,</title> which was widely current about the time of his death (Spitta, 
iii. 181 n.). The Aria, <title>So oft ich meine Tabakspfeife,</title> in A. M. 
Bach's <title>Notenbuch</title> of 1725, should be mentioned.  See B. G. xxxix. 
sec. 4.
</p>
</note> And why should he?  They 
produce themselves so spontaneously that there is 
little call for genius to aid their gestation.
</p>

<figure url="images/bach3.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>Johann Sebastian Bach. <emph>From the picture discovered by Professor Fritz Volbach</emph></head>
<figDesc>Johann Sebastian Bach. From the picture discovered by Professor Fritz Volbach</figDesc>
</figure>


</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VII. BACH AS A TEACHER</head>
<p>
It not infrequently happens that talented composers 
and players are incapable of imparting their 
skill to others.  Either they have never troubled 
to probe the mechanism of their own facility, or, 
through the excellence of their instructors, have 
taken the short cut to proficiency and allowed 
their teacher and not their own judgment to decide 
how a thing should be done.  Such people are 
useless to instruct beginners.  True, they may 
succeed in teaching the rudiments of technique, 
assuming that they have been properly taught 
themselves.  But they are certainly unqualified 
to teach in the full sense of the word.  There is, 
in fact, only one way to become a good teacher, 
and that is to have gone through the discipline 
of self-instruction, a path along which the beginner 
may go astray a thousand times before 
attaining to perfection. For it is just this stumbling 
effort that reveals the dimensions of the art. 
The man who has adventured it learns the obstacles 
that obstruct his path, and how to surmount them. 
To be sure, it is a lengthy method. But if a man
<pb n="93" />
has patience to persevere he will reap a sure reward 
after an alluring pilgrimage.  No musician ever 
founded a school of his own who has not followed 
such a course, and to his experience his 
teaching has owed its distinctive character.
</p>
<p>
This is so with Bach, who, only gradually discovering 
his full stature, was thirty years old 
before unremitting application raised him above 
the difficulties of his art.  But he reaped his 
reward.  Self-discipline set him on the fairest and 
most alluring path that it has ever been given to 
a musician to tread.
</p>
<p>
To teach well a man needs to have a full mind.  
He must have discovered how to meet and have 
overcome the obstacles in his own path before 
he can be successful in teaching others how to 
avoid them.  Bach united both qualities.  Hence, 
as a teacher he was the most instructive, clear, 
and definite that has ever been.  In every branch 
of his art he produced a band of pupils who 
followed in his footsteps, without, however, 
equalling his achievement.
</p>
<p>
First of all let me show how he taught the 
Clavier.<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach's method has come down to us in treatises by two of his 
pupils, C. P. E. Bach's <title>Essay</title> and Kirnberger's <title>Die Kunst des 
reinen Satzes in der Musik,</title> to which reference has been made already.
</p>
</note>
 To begin with, his pupils were made to 
acquire the special touch of which I have already 
spoken.<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Supra</foreign>, p. 60.
</p>
</note>
To that end for months together he 
made them practise nothing but simple exercises
<pb n="94" />
for the fingers of both hands, at the same time 
emphasising the need for clearness and distinctness.  
He kept them at these exercises for from six to 
twelve months, unless he found his pupils losing 
heart, in which case he so far met them as to write 
short studies which incorporated a particular 
exercise.  Of this kind are the <title>Six Little Preludes 
for Beginners,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Bach wrote eighteen Preludes for Beginners.  They are all in P. bk. 200.
</p>
</note> and the <title>Fifteen
Two-part Inventions,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Most of these movements, which Bach called indifferently <q>Inventions</q> (ideas) and <q>Praeambula</q> (Preludes), were written in 1723. 
They are in P. bk. 201. 
</p>
</note>
 both of which Bach wrote 
during the lesson for a particular pupil and afterwards 
improved into beautiful and expressive 
compositions.  Besides this finger practice, either 
in regular exercises or in pieces composed for the 
purpose, Bach introduced his pupils to the use 
of the various ornaments in both hands. 
</p>
<p>
Not until this stage was reached did Bach allow 
his pupils to practise his own larger works, so 
admirably calculated, as he knew, to develop their 
powers.  In order to lessen their difficulty, it 
was his excellent habit to play over to them the 
pieces they were to study, with the remark,
<q>That's how it ought to sound.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
Heinrich Nikolaus Gerber, who 
was Bach's pupil from 1724 to 1727, 
particularly emphasises this feature of Bach's teaching.
</p>
</note> It would be 
difficult to exaggerate the helpfulness of this 
method. The pupil's interest was roused by hearing 
the piece properly played. But that was not 
<pb n="95" />
the sole result.  Without the help thus given 
the pupil could only hope to overcome the difficulties 
of the piece after considerable effort, 
and would find it much less easy to realise a proper 
rendering of it.  As it was, he received at once an 
ideal to aim at and was taught how to surmount 
the difficulties the piece presented.  Many a 
young performer, still imperfect after a year's 
practice, probably would master his music in a 
month if he once had it played over to him.
</p>
<p>
Bach's method of teaching composition was 
equally sure and effective.<note place="foot">
<p>
See on the whole matter Spitta, iii. 117 ff. Bach's method is 
illustrated by his <title>Rules and Instructions</title> (1738) printed by Spitta, 
iii. 315 ff., and also by the <title>Einige h&ouml;chst n&ouml;thinge Regeln</title> at the 
end of A. M. Bach's <title>Notenbuch</title> (1725).
</p>
</note> He did not begin 
with the dry details of counterpoint, as was the 
custom of other teachers in his day.  Still less 
did he burden his pupils with the physical properties 
of sound, which he held to be matter for 
the theorist and instrument-maker rather than 
the composer.  He started them off at once on 
four-part harmony over a figured Bass, making 
his pupils write each part on a separate stave in 
order to impress on them the need for accurate 
harmonic progression.  Then he passed to Hymn 
tunes, setting the Bass himself and making his 
pupils write the Tenor and Alto parts.  In time 
he let them write the Bass also.  He insisted on 
correct harmony and on each part having a real 
melodic line.  Every musician knows what models
<pb n="96" />
Bach has left us in this form.  The inner parts of 
his four-part Hymn-tunes are so smooth and 
melodious that often they might be taken for the 
melody.  He made his pupils aim at similar tunefulness, 
and until they showed a high standard 
of merit did not permit them to write compositions 
of their own.  Meanwhile he aimed at cultivating 
their feeling for pure harmony and for the order 
and connection of ideas and parts by familiarising 
them with the compositions of others.  Until they 
had acquired facility in those qualities he neither 
permitted them nor held them competent to put 
pen to paper.
</p>
<p>
Bach required his pupils in composition to work 
out their musical ideas mentally.  If any of them 
lacked this faculty he admonished him not to 
compose and discountenanced even his sons from 
attempting to write until they had first given 
evidence of genuine musical gifts.  Having completed 
their elementary study of harmony, Bach 
took his pupils on to the theory of Fugue, beginning 
with two-part writing.  In these and other exercises 
he insisted on the pupil composing away 
from the Clavier.<note place="foot">
<p>
Mozart wrote as follows to a correspondent who asked him what 
his method of composition was: <q>I can really say no more on this 
subject than the following; for I myself know no more about it, and 
cannot account for it. When I am, as it were, completely myself, 
entirely alone, and of good cheer&mdash;say, travelling in a carriage, or 
walking after a good meal, or during the night when I cannot sleep; 
it is on such occasions that my ideas flow best and most abundantly. 
<emph>Whence</emph> and <emph>how</emph> they come, I know not; nor can I force them. Those
ideas that please me I retain in memory, and am accustomed, as I 
have been told, to hum them to myself.  If I continue in this way, 
it soon occurs to me how I may turn this or that morsel to account, 
so as to make a good dish of it, that is to say, agreeably to the rules 
of counterpoint, to the peculiarities of the various instruments, etc.  
All this fires my soul, and, provided I am not disturbed, my subject 
enlarges itself, becomes methodised and defined, and the whole, 
though it be long, stands almost complete and finished in my mind, so 
that I can survey it, like a fine picture or a beautiful statue, at a 
glance.  Nor do I hear in my imagination the parts successively, but 
I hear them, as it were, all together.  What a delight this is I cannot 
tell!&hellip;When I proceed to write down my ideas, I take out of the 
bag of my memory, if I may use that phrase, what has previously been 
collected into it in the way I have mentioned.  For this reason the 
committing to paper is done quickly enough, for everything is, as I 
said before, already finished; and it rarely differs on paper from what 
it was in my imagination</q> (Life, ed. Dent, p. 255). 
</p>
<p>
Wagner, writing in 1851 to Uhlig, who could not understand how 
the libretto of <title>Young Siegfried</title> could be set to music, expresses the 
same idea as Mozart: <q>What you cannot possibly imagine is a-making 
of itself!  I tell you, the musical phrases build themselves on these 
verses and periods without my having to trouble at all; everything 
springs as if wild from the ground</q> (Life, trans. Ellis, iii. p. 243).
</p>
<p> 
Schumann writes in 1839: <q>I used to rack my brains for a long 
time, but now I scarcely ever scratch out a note.  It all comes from 
within, and I often feel as if I could go on playing without ever 
coming to an end</q> (Grove, vol. iv. p. 353). 
</p>
</note> Those who did otherwise he ridiculed as <q>Harpsichord Knights.</q>  In the second place he required rigorous attention to each part 
and its relation to the concurrent parts, permitting 
none, not even an inner one, to break off before 
it had finished what it had to say.  He insisted 
upon a correct relation between each note and its 
predecessor.  If he came upon one whose derivation 
or destination was not perfectly clear he 
struck it out as faulty.  It is, indeed, a meticulous 
exactitude in each individual part that makes 
<pb n="98" />
Bach's harmony really multiple melody.  Confused 
part-writing, where a note that belongs to 
the Tenor is given to the Alto, or <foreign lang="la">vice versa</foreign>, or 
the haphazard addition of extraneous parts to a 
chord which suddenly shows an increase of notes 
as if fallen from the sky, to vanish as suddenly 
as they came, are faults found neither in his own 
nor his pupils' writing.  He regarded his musical 
parts as so many persons engaged in conversation.  
If there are three, each of them on occasion may 
be silent and listen to the others until it finds 
something relevant to say itself.  But if, at an interesting 
point of the conversation, an interloping 
voice intervened, Bach regarded it as an intruder 
and let his pupils understand that it could not be 
admitted.
</p>
<p>
Notwithstanding his strictness on this point, 
Bach allowed his pupils considerable licence in 
other respects.  In their use of certain intervals, 
as in their treatment of harmony and melody, he 
let them experiment within the limits of their 
ability, taking care to discountenance ugliness and 
to insist on their giving appropriate expression to 
the character of the composition.  Beauty of expression, 
he postulated, was only attainable on a 
foundation of pure and accurate harmony.  Having 
experimented in every form himself, he liked to 
see his pupils equally adventurous. Earlier 
teachers of composition, for instance, Berardi,<note place="foot">
<p>
Angela Berardi's <title>Documenti armonici. Nelli quali 
con varii discorsi, regole, ed essempii si dimonstrano gli studii arteficiosi della 
musica</title> was published at Bologna in 1687.
</p>
</note>
<pb n="99" />
 Buononcini,<note place="foot">
<p>
Giovanni Maria Buononcini, b. <foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1640, d. 1678; Maestro di Capella at Modena; published his <title>Musico prattico</title> at Bologna in 1673, 1688. 
</p>
</note>
and Fux,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Joseph Fux, b. 1660, d. 1741; Kapellmeister at Vienna; 
published his <title>Gradus ad Parnassum</title> at Vienna in 1725.
</p>
</note> did not allow such liberty.  They were 
afraid to trust their pupils to encounter 
difficulties, and short-sightedly prevented them 
from learning how to overcome them.  Bach's 
system was wiser, for it took his pupils farther, 
since he did not limit their attention, as his predecessors 
did, to the harmonic structure, but extended 
it to the qualities that constitute good 
writing, namely, consistency of expression, variety 
of style, rhythm, and melody.  Those who would 
acquaint themselves with Bach's method of teaching 
composition will find it fully set forth in 
Kirnberger's <title>Correct Art of Composition.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
See <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, p. 74.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
As long as his pupils were under his instruction 
Bach did not allow them to study any but his 
own works and the classics.  The critical sense, 
which permits a man to distinguish good from 
bad, develops later than the aesthetic faculty and 
may be blunted and even destroyed by frequent 
contact with bad music.  The best way to instruct 
youth is to accustom it early to consort 
with the best models.  Time brings experience 
and an instructed judgment to confirm the pupil's 
early attraction to works of true art.
</p>
<pb n="100" />
<p>
Under this admirable method of teaching all 
Bach's pupils became distinguished musicians, 
some more so than others, according as they came 
early or late under his influence, and had opportunity 
and encouragement to perfect and apply 
the instruction they received from him.  His 
two eldest sons, Wilhelm Friedemann and Carl 
Philipp Emmanuel, were his most distinguished 
pupils, not because he gave them better instruction 
than the rest, but because from their earliest 
youth they were brought up amid good music at 
home.  Even before they began their lessons they 
knew what was good.  On the other hand, others, 
before they became Bach's pupils, either had 
heard no good music or their taste had been 
already vitiated by contact with bad.  It at least 
attests the excellence of Bach's method that even 
his pupils thus handicapped took high rank in 
their profession and distinguished themselves in 
one or other of its branches.<note place="foot">
<p>
* I speak here only of those pupils who made music their profession.  
But, besides these, Bach had a great many other pupils.  Every 
dilettante in the neighbourhood desired to boast of the instruction of 
so great and celebrated a man.  Many gave themselves out to have 
been his pupils who had never been taught by him.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach's first pupil was JOHANN CASPAR VOGLER, 
who received instruction from him in his early 
days at Amstadt and Weimar and, on Bach's 
testimony, was an exceedingly able player.  He 
became organist, and later burgomaster, at Weimar, 
retaining his professional position.  Some Choral 
<pb n="101" />
Preludes by him for a two-manualed Organ with 
pedals were engraved about 1737.<note place="foot">
<p>
See Spitta, i. 522; Schweitzer, i. 214 for farther details regarding 
Vogler, who died 
<foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1765.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Other pupils of Bach who became famous 
were:
</p>
<list>
<item>1. HOMILIUS, of Dresden.  He was not only an 
excellent organist but a distinguished composer 
of church music as well.<note place="foot">
<p>
Gottfried August Homilius, b. 1714, d. 1785; pupil of Bach, <foreign lang="la">circ. </foreign>
1735.  Cantor of the Kreuzschule, Dresden. 
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>2. TRANSCHEL, of Dresden. He was a fine 
musician and performer on the Clavier. There 
exist in MS. six Polonaises by him which perhaps 
are superior to those of any composer but Wilhelm 
Friedemann Bach.<note place="foot">
<p>
Christoph Transchel (1721-1800) taught music at Leipzig and 
Dresden; Bach's pupil and friend, <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1742.  See Spitta, iii. 245.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>3. GOLDBERG, of K&ouml;nigsberg. He was a very 
finished player on the Clavier, but without any 
marked talent for composition.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Gottlieb (or Theophilus) Goldberg, clavicenist to Count 
Kaiserling (<foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, p. 119) for whom Bach wrote the so-called <title>Goldberg 
Variations.</title> He was born <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1720 and was a pupil of Bach from 1733-46.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>4. KREBS, Organist at Altenburg. He was not 
only a player of the first rank, but also a prolific 
composer for the Organ, Clavier, and of church 
music. He was fortunate in having Bach's instruction 
for nine years.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Ludwig Krebs, b. 1713, d. 1780; Bach's pupil, 1726-35. 
Bach said of him that he was <q>the best crab (Krebs) in the brook (Bach).</q>
</p>
</note>
</item>
<pb n="102" />

<item>5. ALTNIKOL, Organist at Naumburg.  He was 
Bach's son-in-law and is said to have been a very 
competent player and composer.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Christoph Altnikol, d. 1759. 
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>6. AGRICOLA, Court Composer at Berlin.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Friedrich Agricola, b. 1720, d. 1774; pupil of Bach <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign>
1738-41; Director of the Royal Chapel, Berlin. 
</p>
</note> He 
is less known as a composer than as a theorist. 
He translated Tosi's<note place="foot">
<p>
Pier Francesco Tosi, b. <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1650; singing master in London. 
His <title>Opinioni de' canton antichi e moderni, o sieno osservazioni sopra 
il canto figurato</title> was published at Bologna in 1723.
</p>
</note> <title>II canto figurato</title> from 
Italian into German and provided the work with 
an instructive commentary.
</item>

<item>7. M&Uuml;THEL, of Riga.  He was a good Clavier 
player and wrote for that instrument.  His 
Sonatas and a Duet for two Claviers attest his 
ability as a composer.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Gottfried M&uuml;thel, b. 
<foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1720, d. <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1790; pupil of Bach in 1750 and resident in his house at the time of his death; 
organist of the Lutheran Church, Riga. 
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>8. KIRNBERGER,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Philipp Kirnberger, b. 1721, d. 1783; Bach's pupil, 1739-41. 
</p>
</note> Court Musician at Berlin to 
the Princess Amalia of Prussia.<note place="foot">
<p>
Louisa Amalia, of Brunswick-Wolfenb&uuml;ttel, wife of Frederick the 
Great's brother, and mother of his successor, Frederick William II. (1786-97).
</p>
</note> He was one of 
the most distinguished of Bach's pupils, full of 
genuine enthusiasm for his art and eager to assure 
its interests.  Besides his exposition of Bach's 
system of teaching composition, we are indebted 
to him for the first logical treatise on harmony, 
in which he sets forth his master's teaching and 
<pb n="103" />
practice.  The first work is entitled <title>Kunst des 
reinen Satzes,</title> and the second, <title>Wahre Grunds&auml;tze zum Gebrauch der Harmonie.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
The second work 
was published in 1773 at Berlin. For the first, 
see <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, p. 74. 
</p>
</note> He served 
the interests of his art also by other writings and 
compositions, and was an excellent teacher. The 
Princess Amalia was his pupil. 
</item>

<item>9. KITTEL, Organist at Erfurt.  He is a sound, 
though not a finished, player, and is distinguished 
as a composer by several Organ Trios, so excellent 
that Bach himself might have written them.  He 
is the sole survivor (1802) of Bach's pupils.<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Christian Kittel, b. 1732, d. 1809; 
one of Bach's latest pupils; Organist of the Predigerkirche, Erfurt.  He is said to have 
possessed a portrait of his master and to have rewarded his pupils for 
good playing by drawing the curtain which usually covered the picture 
and permitting them to look upon it.  It is, perhaps, the portrait, 
recently discovered by Dr. Fritz Volbach, which is reproduced at p. 92 
of this volume. 
</p>
</note>
</item> 

<item>10. VOIGT, of Anspach,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nothing seems to be known of him.
</p>
</note> and an organist named 
SCHUBART<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Martin Schubart succeeded Bach at Weimar in 1717.  He 
was born in 1690 and died in 1721. See Spitta, i. 343. 
</p>
</note> were mentioned to me by Carl Philipp 
Emmanuel as having been Bach's pupils.  He 
knew nothing about them except that they 
entered his father's house after he left it.<note place="foot">
<p>
In addition to those mentioned by Forkel, the following pupils of 
Bach are known: Johann Gotthilf Ziegler, of St. Ulrich's Church, 
Halle; J. Bernhard Bach, of Ohrdruf; Heinrich Nikolaus Gerber, 
Organist at Sondershausen; Samuel Anton Bach, of Meiningen; 
Johann Ernst Bach, of Saxe-Weimar; Johann Elias Bach, Cantor at 
Schweinfurt; Johann Tobias Krebs, organist at Buttelst&auml;dt, and his 
sons, Johann Ludwig, Johann Tobias, and Johann Carl; Johann
Schneider, organist of St. Nicolas', Leipzig; Georg Friedrich Einicke, 
Cantor at Frankenhausen; Johann Friedrich Doles, Bach's second 
successor in the Cantorate of St. Thomas'; Rudolph Straube, who 
afterwards settled in England; Christoph Nichelmann, cembalist to 
Frederick the Great; Christian Gr&auml;bner, and Carl Hartwig. 
</p>
<p>
For full information upon Bach's pupils see Spitta, i. 522 ff., ii. 47 ff., 
iii. 116 ff., 239 ff., and the relative articles in Grove's <title>Dictionary.</title>
</p>
</note>
</item>
</list>
<pb n="104" />
<p>
I have said already that Bach's sons were his 
most distinguished pupils.  The eldest, WILHELM 
FRIEDEMANN BACH, came nearest to his father 
in the originality of his genius.  His melodies 
have quite a different character from those of 
other composers.  They are exceedingly clever, 
elegant, and spontaneous.  When performed with 
delicacy, as he played them, they cannot fail to 
charm every hearer.  It is greatly to be regretted 
that he preferred to follow his fancy in extemporisation 
and to expend his genius on fugitive thoughts 
rather than to work them out on paper.  The 
number of his compositions therefore is small, 
but all are beautiful.
</p>
<p>
CARL PHILIPP EMMANUEL BACH, who comes 
next, went out into the world sufficiently early 
to discover that it is a good thing for a composer 
to have a large public behind him.  Hence, in 
the clearness and easy intelligibility of his compositions, 
he approaches the popular style, though 
he scrupulously avoids the commonplace.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel does not do justice to his friend.  C. P. E. Bach is 
recognised 
as the immediate precursor of Haydn and as the link between 
the latter and J. S. Bach.
</p>
</note> Both 
he and his elder brother admitted that they were 
<pb n="105" />
driven to adopt a style of their own by the wish 
to avoid comparison with their incomparable 
father.
</p>
<p>
JOHANN CHRISTOPH FRIEDRICH BACH, Concertmeister at the Court of B&uuml;ckeburg, imitated 
Carl Philipp's style, but was not his equal. 
According to Wilhelm Friedemann, he was the 
best player among the brothers, and the most 
effective performer of their father's Clavier compositions.
</p>
<p>
JOHANN CHRISTIAN BACH, called <q>Bach of 
Milan,</q> and afterwards <q>Bach of London,</q> was 
the youngest son of Bach's second marriage and 
of too tender an age when his father died ever to 
have had lessons from him.  Hence, perhaps, 
the absence of Bach's style in his music.  He was, 
in fact, a popular composer universally admired 
in his day.<note place="foot">
<p>
Mozart had 
a very particular regard for him.  See Schweitzer 
i. 220 on his brothers' abilities as composers.
</p>
</note>
</p>
</div>

<pb n="106" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER VIII.  PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS</head>
<p>
Distinguished as a player, composer, and teacher, 
Bach was also an indulgent father, a good friend, 
and a loyal citizen.  His paternal devotion is 
shown by his care for his children's education, 
and he was equally assiduous in the performance 
of his civil and social duties.  His acquaintance 
was agreeable to everybody.  Every lover of 
music, whatever his nationality, was sure of a 
friendly reception at his house, and his sociability 
and reputation caused him to be seldom without 
visitors.
</p>
<p>
As an artist Bach was exceptionally modest.  
Notwithstanding his pre-eminence in his profession,
a superiority of which he could not but be conscious, 
and in spite of the admiration and respect daily 
shown him, he never gave himself airs.  If he 
was asked the secret of his mastership he would 
answer, <q>I was made to work; if you are equally 
industrious you will be equally successful,</q><note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta (iii. 262) quotes 
a characteristic anecdote.  To some one 
who praised his skill on the Organ Bach replied: <q>There is nothing 
wonderful about it.  You merely strike the right note at the right
moment and the Organ does the rest.</q>
</p>
</note> a 
<pb n="107" />
remark which made no allowance for his own 
exceptional genius.  His opinion of other composers 
and their work was invariably fair and 
generous.  Naturally, much of their work struck 
him as somewhat trivial, viewed from his own 
altitude.  But he never uttered a harsh criticism, 
unless it were to a pupil, to whom he held himself 
bound to say what he thought.  Still less did 
he presume on his acknowledged superiority to 
indulge in braggadocio, as often happens with 
performers brought into touch with those whom 
they regard as their inferiors.  Herein Bach's 
modesty went so far that he never spoke 
voluntarily of his frustrated contest with 
Marchand, though the latter was the challenger.<note place="foot">
<p>
See <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, p. 19.  Bach himself certainly was the challenger. 
</p>
</note>
Many absurd stories are told of Bach; for instance 
that, dressed up as a village schoolmaster, he 
liked to enter a church and ask the organist to 
let him play a Choral, in order to enjoy the astonishment 
excited by his playing, or to hear the Organist 
declare, <q>This must be Bach or the Devil.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
When Handel 
was at Venice in 1708, Domenico Scarlatti, hearing 
a stranger touching the Harpsichord at a masquerade, exclaimed, 
<q>That must either be the famous Saxon or the Devil</q> (Rockstro's
<title>George Frederick Handel,</title> p. 48).  Streatfield (p. 145) mentions a 
similar event which took place in 1737.  Hearing a stranger playing 
a Fugue in one of the Flemish churches, the organist embraced him, 
saying, <q>You can be no other but the great Handel.</q>
</p>
</note>
He always ridiculed such stories, and indeed 
had too much respect for his art to make it cloak 
his vanity. 
</p>
<pb n="108" />
<p>
At musical parties where Quartet or other instrumental 
music was performed, Bach liked to play 
the Viola, an instrument which put him, as it 
were, in the middle of the harmony in a position 
from which he could hear and enjoy it on both 
sides.  On those occasions he would sometimes 
join in a Trio or other piece on the Harpsichord.  
If he was in the mood and the composer was 
agreeable, he would, as has been told already, 
extemporise a new Trio from the Continuo part, 
or, adding a new part, convert the Trio into a 
Quartet. But these were the only occasions on 
which he was ready to display his great powers 
before others.  One Hurlebusch, of Brunswick,<note place="foot">
<p>
Heinrich Lorenz Hurlebusch 
was organist of three churches in 
Brunswick.  His visit to Bach took place in 1730, seemingly.  See 
Schweitzer, i. 154. 
</p>
</note>
a conceited and arrogant Clavier player, once 
visited Bach at Leipzig, not to hear him play, 
but to play to him.  Bach received him politely 
and listened patiently to his very indifferent performance. 
On taking leave Hurlebusch made 
Bach's eldest sons a present of his published 
Sonatas, exhorting them to study them diligently. 
Bach, knowing the kind of music his sons were 
wont to play, smiled at Hurlebusch's na&iuml;vet&eacute; but 
did not permit him to suspect his amusement.<note place="foot">
<p>
Schweitzer prints 
an appreciation of Hurlebusch which suggests 
that he was a man of distinct ability and <q>a paragon of politeness.</q>
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach was fond of listening to the music of other 
composers. If he and one of his elder sons 
<pb n="109" />
happened to be in church when a Fugue was played, 
directly the subject had been stated he always 
pointed out how it ought to be developed.  If the 
composer knew his business and fulfilled Bach's 
anticipations, he was pleased and nudged his son 
to draw his attention to the fact.  Is this not 
evidence of his impartial interest in other people's 
compositions? 
</p>
<p>
I have mentioned already the composers whom 
in his youth Bach esteemed, loved, and studied.  
Later, when experience ripened his critical faculty, 
he had other favourites, among them Imperial 
Kapellmeister Fux, Handel, Caldara,<note place="foot">
<p>
Antonio Caldara, b. 
<foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1670; vice-Kapellmeister at Vienna, 
1716-36; d. 1736. 
</p>
</note> Reinhard 
Keiser, Hasse,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Adolph Hasse, b. 1699, d. 1783; Kapellmeister and 
Director of the Opera, Dresden. 
</p>
</note> the two Grauns,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Gottlieb Graun, b. <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1698, d. 1771; conductor of the 
royal Kapelle, Berlin.
</p>
<p>
Carl Heinrich Graun, b. 1701, d. 1759; like his brother, in Frederick 
the Great's service. 
</p>
</note> Telemann,<note place="foot">
<p>
Georg Philipp Telemann, b. 1681, d. 1767; Cantor and Musik-direktor in Hamburg. 
</p>
</note> 
Zelenka,<note place="foot">
<p>
Johann Dismas Zelenka, b. 1679 
or 1681, d. 1745; Court Composer 
at Dresden.
</p>
</note> Benda,<note place="foot">
<p>
Franz Benda, b. 1709, d. 1786; Concertmeister to Frederick the 
Great upon the death of J. G. Graun.
</p>
</note> etc., and, in general, the distinguished 
musicians at Dresden and Berlin.  He 
was acquainted with all except the first four of 
those I mention.  In his youth Bach was intimate 
with Telemann.<note place="foot">
<p>
On Telemann's influence on Bach see Spitta, ii. 437.
</p>
</note> He also had a very warm regard 
<pb n="110" />
for Handel and often expressed a desire to know 
him.  As Handel, like himself, was a famous performer 
on the Organ and Clavier, many in Leipzig 
and its neighbourhood wished to bring the two 
great men together.  But Handel, then living in 
London, never found time for a meeting during 
the visits he paid to Halle, his native town.  On 
his first visit in 1719, Bach was at C&ouml;then, only 
some twenty miles distant.  As soon as he was 
informed of Handel's arrival he lost not a moment 
in setting out to visit him, but on his arrival 
found that Handel had returned to England.  At 
the time of Handel's second visit, between 1730 
and 1740,<note place="foot">
<p>
Handel's second visit to Halle took place in June 1729.  His 
mother's illness detained him.  See Streatfield, p. 110. 
</p>
</note> Bach was prevented from leaving 
Leipzig by indisposition.  But no sooner was he 
advised of Handel's arrival at Halle than he sent 
his eldest son, Wilhelm Friedemann, to beg him 
to visit Leipzig, an invitation which Handel was 
unable to accept.  In 1752 or 1753, when Handel 
paid his third visit to Germany,<note place="foot">
<p>
Handel's third visit took place in July-August 1760.  He was 
laid up by a severe accident in the course of it, and appears to have 
not recovered from it at the time of Bach's death.
</p>
</note> Bach was dead. 
He had always expressed the strongest desire to 
know Handel, and the Leipzig people were disappointed 
in their wish to hear the two great 
men together.
</p>
<p>
While Hasse was Kapellmeister at Dresden 
both the Opera and Kapelle flourished.  Bach 
<pb n="111" />
had many friends at Dresden, who held him in 
high regard.  Among them may be mentioned 
Hasse and his wife, the celebrated Faustina.<note place="foot">
<p>
Faustina Bordoni, b. 1693, d. 1783; 
m. Hasse in 1730.  She was 
one of the most famous singers of the day.
</p>
</note>
They often visited Leipzig and were admirers of 
the Cantor's rare talents.  Hence, at Dresden he 
was always received in the most respectful 
manner and often visited the Opera, generally 
accompanied by his eldest son.  When the time 
for their journey approached Bach would say in 
fun, <q>Well, Friedemann, shall we go to Dresden 
to hear the pretty tunes<note place="foot">
<p>
The original has <q>Liederchen.</q>
</p>
</note> again?</q> Innocent as 
the jest was, I am sure Bach would not have 
uttered it to any but his son, who already could 
distinguish between great music and agreeable 
trifles.
</p>
<p>
Bach was never in a position to make what is 
called a brilliant fortune.<note place="foot">
<p>
See 
<foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, p. 37.  Compare Handel's case.  He received a royal 
pension of &pound;600 per annum, and though he was twice a bankrupt, left
&pound;20,000.
</p>
</note> He held a fairly 
lucrative office, but his income had to maintain 
and educate a large family.  He neither possessed 
nor sought other means of livelihood, and was too 
absorbed in his art and work to think of accepting 
engagements which, in those days, and to a man 
of his genius, certainly would have brought riches.  
Had he possessed a taste for travel he would, as 
even one of his detractors admits, have <q>drawn 
<pb n="112" />
upon himself the admiration of the whole world.</q> 
But he preferred a quiet domestic life, constant 
occupation in his work, with contentment and 
a moderate competence, like his forbears.  
His modesty, however, did hot prevent him 
from receiving manifold proofs of regard and 
affection and marks of honourable distinction.  
Prince Leopold of C&ouml;then, Duke Ernst August 
of Weimar,<note place="foot">
<p>
The Duke was the nephew of, and succeeded, Duke Wilhelm Ernst 
in 1728. 
</p>
</note> and Duke Christian of Weissenfels, 
all showed sincere regard for him, which must have 
been the more agreeable to him seeing that they 
were all sound judges of music.  At Berlin, as at 
Dresden, he was universally honoured and respected.  
If we add to these testimonies the fact 
that he captured the admiration of all who heard 
him play or were acquainted with his music, then 
we may be sure that Bach, <q>singing for himself 
and the Muses,</q> received at the hands of Fame the 
recognition he valued most, and cherished it far 
more than the trivial honour of a ribbon or gold 
chain.
</p>
<p> 
I add that, in 1747, Bach became a member 
of the <q>Society of the Musical Sciences,</q> founded 
by Mizler, only because we owe to the circumstance 
his admirable Choral Variations on <title>Vom 
Himmel hoch.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
The Canonic Variations 
on the melody are published by Novello 
bk. 19, p. 73. For the Mizler Society, see <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, p. xxiv. 
</p>
</note> He presented them to the 
<pb n="113" />
Society on his admission and they were engraved 
subsequently.<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta (iii. 294) regards the statement as incorrect and holds that 
the work was engraved before Bach joined Mizler's Society in June 
1747.  Pirro (p. 215) supports Spitta and regards the Variations as 
having been engraved at N&uuml;rnberg <q>vers 1746.</q>
</p>
</note>
</p>
</div>

<pb n="114" />

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER IX. BACH'S COMPOSITIONS</head>

<p>
To have produced so many great works in all forms of musical expression Bach necessarily must have been a prolific writer.  For if a composer be the greatest genius in the world, unless he constantly exercises his art he cannot hope to produce real masterpieces.  Superlative excellence is the fruit of indefatigable application.  Yet in Bach's case we should be wrong to acclaim as masterpieces all the products of his great activity just because masterpieces at length were the fruit of it.  Already in his early compositions we find undeniable evidence of genius.  But they are blemished by faults, passages poor in quality, extravagant, insipid, that are hardly worth preserving, though of interest to the student who wishes to trace from its source the development of Bach's genius.
</p>
<p>
It is not difficult to distinguish with exactitude those of Bach's early compositions which are of the first excellence; for he has been at pains to give us the clue.  As he did not publish his first work until he was about forty years
<pb n="115" />
old <note place="foot">
<p>
The first of Bach's works to be engraved was the M&uuml;hlhausen Cantata, <title>Gott ist mein K&ouml;nig,</title> (parts only).  It was published in 1708, when Bach was twenty-three years old.  Forkel refers to Partita I. in the first Part of the <title>Clavier&uuml;bung</title> (P. bk. 205 p. 4).  It was engraved in 1726, when Bach was forty-one years old.  In 1731 he republished it, with five others that had appeared in the interval, in the first Part of the <title>Clavier&uuml;bung</title> (P. bks. 205, 206).
</p>
</note>
we are justified in assuming the merit of what, at so mature an age, he thought worthy to put into print, and in concluding generally that all his engraved works are of first-rate merit.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's rather casual critical axioms seem to be as follows: <q>Publication postulates excellence</q>; <q>An amended MS. implies that the original text was not a finished work of art.</q>
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
With respect to his unpublished compositions, and they are by far the most numerous, we must in order to distinguish their merit rely partly on a critical examination of their texts, partly on Bach's own judgment.  Like all great composers, he was continually working on his compositions with a view to making them still more finished.  Indeed, he actually attempted to improve some of them that were already perfect.  Any that were susceptible of improvement he improved, even those already engraved.  Such is the origin of the variant readings of his works found in older and more recent texts.  By constantly retouching his compositions Bach aimed at making them indisputable masterpieces.  In this category I place most of what he wrote before the year 1725, as I show in detail in the following catalogue.  A great
<pb n="116" />
 many compositions subsequent to 1725, which for reasons easily understood are still in MS., bear too evidently the stamp of perfection to leave us in doubt whether to class them as early essays or as the finished work of an accomplished master.
</p>
<p>
The following are those of Bach's works which have been engraved:
</p>
<list>
<item>1. <title>Clavier&uuml;bung</title>, or <q>Exercises for the Clavier, consisting of Preludes, Allemandes, Courantes, Sarabandes, Gigues, Minuets, etc., for the Diversion of Amateurs. Opus I. Published by the Composer, 1731.</q>  This was Bach's first published work and contains six Suites.  The first of them came out in 1726;<note place="foot">
<p>
It was the first work engraved by Bach himself, though the parts of the Cantata  <title>Gott ist mein K&ouml;nig</title> had been published by the Town Council at M&uuml;hlhausen in 1708.
</p>
</note> the others followed in successive years until all were engraved together in 1731.<note place="foot">
<p>
The work was published at Leipzig <q>in Commission bey Boetii Seel, hinderlassenen Tochter, unter den Rath-hause.</q>  The Suites, or Partitas (P. bks. 205, 206), are in B flat major, C minor, A minor, D major, G major, E minor.
</p>
</note> The work was much noticed at the time.  Such compositions for the Clavier had not been seen or heard before, and the man who could play them was sure of a success.  Our young players to-day would profit by the study of them, so brilliant, agreeable, expressive, and original are they. In the new edition<note place="foot">
<p>
In 1801 Hoffmeister and K&uuml;hnel unsuccessfully attempted to publish Bach's works by subscription.
</p>
</note> they are entitled, <q>Exercises for the Clavier.</q></item>
<pb n="117" />
<item>2. <title>Clavier&uuml;bung</title>, or <q>Exercises for the Clavier, Part II., consisting of a Concerto in the Italian style and an Overture in the French manner<note place="foot">
<p>
The Partita in B minor (P. bk. 208 p. 20).
</p>
</note> for a Clavier with two manuals.  Published by Christopher Weigel, Junior, in N&uuml;rnberg.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
The work was published in 1735.  The Italian Concerto in F major is published by Novello and P. bk. 207.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>3. <title>Clavier&uuml;bung</title>, or <q>Exercises for the Clavier, Part III., consisting of various Organ Preludes to the Catechism and other Hymns, composed for the diversion of amateurs and particularly of competent judges of such works.  Published by the Composer.</q>  Besides the Preludes and Fugues for the Organ, all of which are masterly, the book contains four Duetti for the Clavier,<note place="foot">
<p>
The work appeared in 1739.  It was intended to contain works for the Organ only; the four Duetti are incongruous and seem to have crept in by mistake.  See the scheme of the work discussed in Terry, <title>Bach's Chorals,</title> Part III.  The Choral Preludes are in Novello's ed., bk. xvi.
</p>
</note> models of their kind.
</item>

<item>4. <title>Sechs Chor&auml;le</title>, or <q>Six Choral Melodies of different kinds, for an Organ with two manuals and pedal.  Zella, in the Thuringian Forest.  Published by Johann G. Sch&uuml;bler.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
The work was published <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1747-50.  Five of the six movements certainly, and the sixth with practical certainty, are adaptations to the Organ of movements out of Bach's Church Cantatas.  See Parry, <title>Bach,</title> p. 535.  The Chorals are in Novello's ed., bk. xvi.
</p>
</note> They are full of dignity and religious feeling.  In some of them, too, we have instances of Bach's original management
<pb n="118" />
of the stops.<note place="foot">
<p>
See <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, p. 65.
</p>
</note>
 Thus, in the second Choral, <title>Wo soll ich fliehen hin,</title> he gives to the first manual an 8 foot, to the second a 16 foot, and to the pedal a 4 foot stop.  The pedal has the cantus firmus.<note place="foot">
<p>
Thus the pedal sounds above the part given to the second manual and is often the topmost part.  See Novello's ed., bk. xvi. 4.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>5.
<title>Clavier&uuml;bung</title>, or <q>Exercises for the Clavier, consisting of an Aria with several Variations, for a Clavier with two manuals. Published by Balthasar Schmidt at N&uuml;rnberg.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
Published <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1742; the so-called <q>Goldberg Variations.</q> They are in P. bk. 209.
</p>
</note> This admirable work consists of thirty Variations, some in canon, in a variety of movements and at all intervals from the unison to the ninth, with easy flowing melody.  It includes a regular fourpart Fugue,<note place="foot">
<p>
Variation No. 10 is a Fughetta in four parts.
</p>
</note> several extremely brillant Variations for two Claviers,<note place="foot">
<p>
Ten of the Variations are marked <q>a 2 Clav.,</q> that is, for two keyboards or manuals: Nos. 8, 11, 13, 14, 17, 20, 23, 25, 26, 28. Nos. 5, 7, 29 are marked <q>a 1 ovvero 2 Clav.</q>
</p>
</note> and concludes with a Quodlibet, as it is called, which alone would render its composer immortal, though it is not the best thing in the volume.<note place="foot">
<p>
The movement is constructed upon two merry folk-songs, <title>Kraut and R&uuml;ben haben mich vertrieben,</title> and <title>Ich bin so lang nicht bei dir gewirt</title>.
</p>
</note>
<p>
The Variations are models of what such compositions ought to be, though no one has been so rash as to attempt to follow Bach's footsteps.
<pb n="119" />
We owe them to Count Kaiserling, formerly Russian Ambassador at the Saxon Electoral Court, who frequently visited Leipzig with Goldberg, already mentioned<note place="foot">
<p>
See supra, p. 101.
</p>
</note> among Bach's pupils.  The Count was a great invalid and suffered from insomnia.  Goldberg lived in the Ambassador's house, and slept in an adjoining room, to be ready to play to him when he was wakeful.  One day the Count asked Bach to write for Goldberg some Clavier music of a soothing and cheerful character, that would relieve the tedium of sleepless nights.  Bach thought a set of Variations most likely to fulfil the Count's needs, though, on account of the recurrence of the same basic harmony throughout, it was a form to which he had hitherto paid little attention.  Like all his compositions at this period, however, the Variations are a masterpiece, and are the only example he has left us of this form.<note place="foot">
<p>
In fact Bach wrote the early <title>Aria variata alla maniera Italiana</title> (Peters bk. 215, p. 12) for the Clavier.  For the Organ he wrote four sets of Variations upon as many Choral melodies (Novello bk. xix.).  But all except the Goldberg Variations are youthful works, and in his maturity Bach clearly had no liking for the form.  The theme of the Goldberg Variations, moreover, is itself a youthful idea; at least it dates back to as early as 1725, and is found in A. M. Bach's <title>Notenbuch</title> (No. 26, Aria in G major).
</p>
</note> The Count always called them <q>my Variations</q> and was never weary of hearing them.  For long afterwards, when he could not sleep, he would say, <q>Play me one of my
<pb n="120" />
Variations, Goldberg.</q> Perhaps Bach was never so well rewarded for any composition as for this.  The Count gave him a golden goblet containing one hundred louis d'ors, though, as a work of art, Bach would not have been overpaid had the present been a thousand times as large.  It may be observed, that in the engraved copy of the Variations there are serious mistakes, which the composer has corrected in his own copy.<note place="foot">
<p>
There is no reference to these corrigenda in the B. G. edition.
</p>
</note>
</p>
</item>

<item>6. <title>Einige kanonische Verd&auml;derungen,</title> <q>Canonic Variations on the Christmas Hymn <q>Vom Himmel hoch da komm ich her,</q> for an Organ with two manuals and pedal. Published at N&uuml;rnberg by Balthasar Schmidt.</q> The work contains five canonic variations of the utmost ingenuity.<note place="foot">
<p>
The work has been referred to already in connection with Bach's membership of Mizler's Society (supra, p. 112).  It was composed presumably <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1746 and in point of technical skill is the most brilliant of Bach's instrumental works.  Forkel states that it was engraved after June 1747, when Bach joined Mizler's Society.  Spitta (iii. 295) is of opinion that it was already engraved by then.  It is in bk. xix. of Novello's edition.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>7. <title>Musikalisches Opfer</title>, or <q>A Musical Offering,</q> dedicated to Frederick II., King of Prussia.  The theme received by Bach from the King<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Supra</foreign>, p. 25.
</p>
</note> is treated first as a three-part Fugue under the acrostic title <q>Ricercare</q> (<foreign lang="la">Regis iussu cantio et reliqua canonica arte resoluta</foreign>). There follows a six-part <q>Ricercare</q> and <foreign lang="la">Thematis regii elaborationes canonicae</foreign>
<pb n="121" />
of various kinds.<note place="foot">
<p>
The presentation copy of the work, which Bach sent to Frederick along with a dedicatory letter (July 7, 1747), is in the Berlin Amalienbibliothek and proves that only the first third of the work, as far as the <q>Ricercare a sei voci</q> (see B.G. XXXI. (2)) was sent then.  The latter and the remaining canons were dispatched subsequently probably by the hand of C. P. E. Bach.  The six-part Ricercare was a particular compliment to the King.  Frederick had desired Bach on his visit to play a Fugue in six parts but left it to the player to select his theme.  Bach now employed the 
<foreign lang="la">thema regium</foreign> for the purpose.  The first reissue of the work was by Breitkopf and Haertel in 1832. Peters (bk. 219) brought it out in 1866. See Schweitzer, i. 417 IV. and Spitta, iii. 191 ff. and 292.
</p>
</note> The work includes a Trio for Flute, Violin, and Clavier upon the same subject.<note place="foot">
<p>
In C minor (P. bk. 237 p. 3).
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>8. <title>Die Kunst der Fuge</title>, or <q>The Art of Fugue.</q>  This work, unique of its kind, did not appear till about 1752, after Bach's death, though the greater part of it had been engraved by his sons during his lifetime.<note place="foot">
<p>
The statement is inaccurate.  The work was written for the most part in 1749 and the greater part of it was prepared for engraving by Bach himself during his last illness.  None of his elder sons was with him at his death, and the blunders that disfigure the engraved copy show that they clumsily finished their father's work.  It is in P. bk. 218.
</p>
</note> Marpurg,<note place="foot">
<p>
Friedrich Wilhelm Marpurg, b. 1718, d. 1795.
</p>
</note> the leading German musical critic of that day, contributed a preface to this edition which contains many just observations on the value and utility of such treatises.<note place="foot">
<p>
The work was published shortly after Bach's death, but had no sale.  C. P. E. Bach then commissioned Marpurg to write a preface, and the new edition was published at the Leipzig Fair, Easter, 1762.  In four years only about thirty copies were sold. See Spitta, iii. 197 ff. and Schweitzer, i. 423 ff.
</p>
</note> But, being too good for the general public, the work found only a small circulation among those who discerned its merit and eagerly bought copies.
<pb n="122" />
The plates were never used again and eventually were sold<note place="foot">
<p>
In 1756.  See C. P. E. Bach's advertisement in Felix Grenier, p. 232.
</p>
</note> by Bach's heirs at the price of old copper.  Written by a man of Bach's transcendent genius, and commended as a masterpiece by a critic so highly regarded as Marpurg, a work of this kind, if published in any other country than Germany, would have passed through at least ten editions by now, if only at the bidding of patriotism.  But in Germany not a sufficient number of copies was sold to pay for the plates used in engraving the work!
<p>
The work consists of fugal Variations planned on the most elaborate scale.<note place="foot">
<p>
The work contains six Fugues and four canons upon the same theme; an unfinished Fugue <q>a tre soggetti,</q> the first four notes of the third of which spell B A C H; and the Choral Prelude <q>Wenn wir in h&ouml;chsten N&ouml;then sein.</q>
</p>
</note> The composer's intention was to show in what a variety of ways the same theme can be treated fugally.  The Variations (here called <q>Contrapunctus</q>)<note place="foot">
<p>
Schweitzer explains: <q>His purpose in this work being a purely theoretical one, Bach writes the Fugues out in score, and calls them <q>counterpoints</q></q>
</p>
</note> are complete Fugues upon the same theme.  The last Fugue of all has three subjects, in the third of which the composer signs his name, B A C H.<note place="foot">
<p>
<figure url="images/B_A_C_H.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w30">
<figDesc>B A C H in German musical notation</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
</note>
<pb n="123" />
Bach was prevented from finishing it by the disorder of his eyes, and as an operation brought no relief the movement was never completed.  It is said that Bach intended to introduce four themes into it and to bring it to an impressive conclusion by inverting them all. All the Fugues in the work are equally smooth and melodious.
</p>
<p>
To make up for the unfinished Fugue Bach concluded the work with a Choral Prelude upon the tune <q>Wenn wir in h&ouml;chsten N&ouml;then sein,</q> which he dictated to his son-in-law, Altnikol, a few days before his death.<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Supra</foreign>, p. 27.  The movement is in N. bk. 17 p. 85.  It is not certain that Bach intended the Prelude or the unfinished Fugue to be included.
</p>
</note> Of the extraordinary skill it displays I do not speak, save to remark that even in his last illness it proclaims Bach's skill undiminished.  The pious resignation and devotion that characterise it move me deeply whenever I play it.  Nor should I find it easy to say which I had rather had been omitted, the Choral Prelude, or the conclusion of the unfinished Fugue.
</p>
</item>

<item>9. Lastly, after Bach's death, his four-part Chorals were collected by his son, Carl Philipp Emmanuel, and were published by Birnstiel (Berlin and Leipzig), Part I. in 1765, Part II. in 1769.<note place="foot">
<p>
C. P. E. Bach was only concerned with the first volume.  Erk, in his edition of the <title>Choralges&auml;nge,</title> conjectures that Kirnberger was responsible for the second.
</p>
</note> Each Part contains one hundred Chorals,
<pb n="124" />
mostly taken from the composer's church Cantatas.
<p>
More recently Kirnberger edited, in four volumes, a collection of Bach's Chorals. They are published by Breitkopf.<note place="foot">
<p>
The four volumes were published at Leipzig between 1784-87.  Spitta states that C. P. E. Bach was the editor.  Erk joins Kirnberger with him in that position.  As C. P. E. Bach died in 1788 Kirnberger's association with the work is probable, especially if he had already been responsible for the 1769 volume.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Bach's works, still in MS., consist of compositions for the Clavier, Organ, with and without other instruments, Strings, and the voice.  I will enumerate them in that order.
</p>
</item>
</list>

<div>
<head type="sub">I. Compositions For The Clavier</head>
<list>
<item>1. <title>Six Little Preludes far Beginners</title>.<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach's Clavier school consisted of eighteen Preludes for beginners (all in B.G. XXXVI.); the two-part and three-part Inventions; and the <title>Well-tempered Clavier.</title>  The six Preludes mentioned by Forkel, and which alone he knew, were published by him for the first time.  Seven more are found in Wilhelm Friedemann's <title>Clavierb&uuml;chlein</title> (B.G. XLV. (1)), and the remaining five have survived in texts handed down by others of Bach's pupils.  The eighteen are in P. bk. 200.
</p>
</note></item>

<item>2. <title>Fifteen Two-part Inventions</title>.  An Invention is a musical theme so constructed that by imitation and inversion a whole movement can be evolved from it.  The subject having been first stated, the rest develops naturally out of it.  For the instruction of a young Clavier player these fifteen Inventions are of great value, seeing that the composer has been careful not only to provide exercises for both hands but for every finger as
<pb n="125" />
well.  They were composed at C&ouml;then in 1723, with a long title which begins: <q>An honest Guide, in which lovers of the Clavier are shown a clear method of playing correctly in two parts,</q> etc.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Autograph was written at C&ouml;then and is dated 1723.  It also contains the fifteen Symphonies, or three-part Inventions mentioned in paragraph 3.  Both Inventions and Symphonies are in F. bk. 201.  According to Spitta (ii. 57 n.) the Inventions were published at Leipzig in 1763.  See also Schweitzer, i. 328 ff.
</p>
</note>

<p>
It cannot be denied that, among other blemishes, the Inventions occasionally exhibit melodic poverty and roughness.  But finding them useful to his pupils, Bach eventually revised them and removed from them everything that offended his maturer taste, so that they now stand as masterpieces of pure music.  Moreover they are invaluable exercises for the fingers and hands and are sound instructors of taste.  There is no better introduction to Bach's larger works than they afford.
</p>
</item>

<item>3. <title>Fifteen three-part Inventions</title>, also called Symphonies.  They were written for the same purpose as the Inventions, but are more advanced.<note place="foot">
<p>
See the previous note.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>4. <title>The Well-tempered Clavier</title>, or, Preludes and Fugues in all tones and semitones, composed for the profit and use of young musicians desirous of knowledge, as also for those who are skilled already in this <foreign lang="it">studio</foreign>.  Part I. was finished in 1722.  Part II., like Part I., contains twenty-four Preludes and twenty-four Fugues in every key,
<pb n="126" />
and was composed at a later period.<note place="foot">
<p>
The second Part was compiled in 1744 and Bach's Autograph of it, though not the earliest Autograph, is in the British Museum.  See Schweitzer, i. 331 ff. and Spitta, ii. 161 ff.  The whole work is in P. bks. 1, 2; or 1a, 1b; or 2790a, 2790b.
</p>
</note> Every number of it, from first to last, is a masterpiece.  In Part I., however, certain Preludes and Fugues bear marks of immaturity and are included probably only in order to complete the series.  But here again Bach eventually corrected whatever seemed to him lacking in finish.  He altered or rewrote entire passages, so that in the later texts few movements are not perfect.  Among these few I reckon the Fugues in A minor,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 20. Spitta (ii. 164) attributes it to the years 1707 or 1708.  Schweitzer (i. 332) also regards it as a youthful piece written, moreover, for the pedal Clavicembalo.
</p>
</note> G major and G minor,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 15 and 16.  Spitta, admitting that the two do not rank with the most interesting in the collection, finds no indication of their being of different date from the best movements.
</p>
</note> C major,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 1. Here Spitta (ii. 165 n.) challenges Forkel.
</p>
</note> F major and F minor.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 11 and 12.  In regard to No. 12 (F minor) Spitta holds Forkel to be in error.  As to No. 11, he expresses the same opinion as in note 3, 
<foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>.
</p>
</note> The rest are excellent, some of them so superlatively good as to be not inferior to those in Part II.<note place="foot">
<p>
The date 1744 places the second Part among Bach's latest compositions.  On the other hand, like the first Part, it contained work of earlier date.
</p>
</note> Even Part II., for all its original perfection, has been improved by the composer, as may be observed by comparing the original and later texts.  Both Parts contain treasures of art not to be found outside Germany.
</item>

<pb n="127" />

<item>5. <title>Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue in D minor (P. bk. 207 p. 4).  It probably dates from <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1720-23.
</p>
</note> I have taken considerable pains to discover a similar piece of music by Bach, but without success.  The Fantasia is unique and unequalled.  Wilhelm Friedemann sent it to me from Brunswick inscribed with these words by a mutual friend. <q>Anbey kommt an etwas Musik von Sebastian, sonst genannt: <foreign lang="la">Fantasia chromatica</foreign>; bleibt sch&ouml;n in alle Saecula.</q>

<p>
It is remarkable that this piece, for all its technical skill, appeals to the most unpractised hearer, if it is performed at all tolerably.
</p>
</item>

<item>6. A <title>Fantasia in C minor</title>.  It is not of the same character as the preceding work, but resembles rather the Allegro of a Sonata.  It is divided into two parts, but must be played as a single movement.  It is an excellent work, and in old copies an unfinished Fugue follows, which, however, cannot belong to it.<note place="foot">
<p>
The MS. was discovered in 1876 and is now at Dresden. It was written circ. 1738 and disproves Forkel's conjecture that the fugue did not belong to the Fantasia and is only partially by Bach.  The Fugue contains forty-seven bars.  As the Autograph is a fair copy the Fugue cannot be called unfinished.  See Spitta, iii. 182.  The Fantasia is in P. bk. 207 p. 50; the Fugue in P. bk. 212 p. 88. See B.C. xxxvi., xxxviii., and xlii. for other Clavier Fantasias.
</p>
</note> The first thirty bars certainly are by Bach, for they are marked by an extremely bold use of augmented and diminished intervals and their inversions, in three-part harmony.  None but Bach attempted such things.
<pb n="128" />
  The rest of the movement seems to have been added by another hand and bears no trace of Bach's style.
</item>

<item>7. <title>Six large Suites</title>, consisting of Preludes, Allemandes, Courantes, Sarabandes, etc.  They are known as the <q>English Suites,</q> because the composer wrote them for an Englishman of rank.<note place="foot">
<p>
The true explanation seems to be that the Prelude of the first Suite (A major) is based upon a Gigue by Charles Dieupart (d. <foreign lang="la">circ.</foreign> 1740), a popular teacher and composer in England.  The words <foreign lang="fr">fait pour les Anglois</foreign>, which head the A major Suite in an early MS., have been wrongly interpreted as applying to the whole set of six.  They merely indicate Dieupart's borrowed Gigue. See Grove, vol. i. 701, and Parry, <title>J. S. Bach,</title> p. 463.  A copy of the work exists, of date 1724-27, made by one of Bach's pupils.  But the composition of the Suites may certainly be assigned to the C&ouml;then period.  They are published in P. bks. 203, 204.
</p>
</note>  All of them are of great merit as works of art, and some movements, in particular the Gigues of the fifth and sixth Suites, are perfect masterpieces of harmony and melody.
</item>

<item>8. <title>Six small Suites</title>, consisting of Allemandes, Courantes, etc. They are generally called the <q>French Suites,</q> because they are written in the French style.<note place="foot">
<p>
The French Suites undoubtedly date back to the C&ouml;then period, since they figure, though incomplete, in the <title>Notenbuch</title> of A. M. Bach (1722). They are published in P. bk. 202.
</p>
</note> The composer is intentionally less academic in them than in his larger Suites, and their melodies are more than usually pleasant and agreeable.  In particular the fifth Suite deserves to be noticed: all its movements are most melodious, and in the concluding Gigue
<pb n="129" />
only consonant intervals, especially thirds and sixths, are used.
</item>
</list>

<p>
These are Bach's principal works for the Clavier which can be considered classics.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's incomplete catalogue may be compared with the Bachgesellschaft volumes III., XIV., XXV. (1), XXXI. (2), XXXVI., XLIL, XLIII. (1 and 2), XLV. (1).  See generally Schweitzer, ch. 15, and Pirro, pp. 218 ff.
</p>
</note> A great number of single Suites,<note place="foot">
<p>
P. bks. 205, 206, 208, 212 (fragment in F minor), 214, 215, 1959.
</p>
</note>Toccatas and Fugues,<note place="foot">
<p>
P. bks. 200, 210, 211, 212, 214, 215, 1959.
</p>
</note> besides those already mentioned, have great and varying merit, but are youthful works.<note place="foot">
<p>
For the most part these youthful works will be found in B.G. XXXVI.
</p>
</note> At the most, ten or twelve of them seem to me worth preserving, some of them because they would be useful as finger exercises, for which their author originally intended them, others because they are at least better than similar works by other composers.  As an exercise for the fingers of both hands I particularly single out a Fugue in A minor,<note place="foot">
<p>
P. bk. 207 p. 16.
</p>
</note> in which the composer has been at great pains to write florid passages in order to give equal strength and suppleness to both hands.  For beginners a little two-part Fugue<note place="foot">
<p>
In C minor (P. bk. 200 p. 10).
</p>
</note> should also prove useful.  It is melodious, flowing, and not at all old-fashioned.
</p>
</div>

<div>
<pb n="130" />
<head type="sub">II. Music For The Clavier With Other 
Instruments</head>

<list>
<item>1. <title>Six Sonatas for Clavier with Violin obbligato</title>.  Composed at C&ouml;then, they are among Bach's masterpieces in this form and display fugal and canonic writing which is both natural and full of character.  The Violin part needs a master to play it; for Bach knew the capabilities of the instrument and spared it as little as the Clavier.  The six Sonatas are in the keys of B minor, A major, E major, C minor, F minor, and G major.<note place="foot">
<p>
In P. bks. 232, 233.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>2. <title>Several Sonatas for Harpsichord and Violin</title>,<note place="foot">
<p>
Suite in A major (P. bk. 236), Sonata in E minor (P. bk. 236), Fugue in G minor (P. bk. 236), four Inventions (P. bk. 2957), Sonata in G minor (BG. ix. 274; not in P.), Sonata in C major for 2 Violins and Clavier (P. bk. 237).
</p>
</note> <title>Harpsichord and Flute</title>,<note place="foot">
<p>
There are six Sonatas for Flute and Clavier, in B minor, E flat major, A minor, C major, E minor, E major (P. bks. 234, 235).
</p>
</note> <title>Harpsichord and Viol da Gamba</title>.<note place="foot">
<p>
There are three Sonatas for Clavier and Gamba, in G major, D major, G minor (P. bk. 239).
</p>
</note> They are admirably written and most of them are pleasant to listen to even today.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel omits two Sonatas for Violin, Flute, and Clavier, in G major and C minor (both in P. bk. 237).
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>3. <title>Several Concertos for the Clavier and other instruments</title>.  They contain real gems of art but are antiquated in form.<note place="foot">
<p>
As Forkol mentions in secs. 4, 5, 6 the Concertos for two, three, and four Claviers, perhaps he had in mind here seven Concertos for Clavier and Orchestra (P. bks. 248-254).  A Concerto for Clavier, Violin, Flute, and Orchestra (P. bk. 255 p. 4) in A minor also should be mentioned.  Also an Overture, in G minor, for Clavier and Strings (B.G. XLV. (1) p. 190; not in P.)
</p>
</note>
</item>
<pb n="131" />

<item>4. <title>Two Concertos for two Claviers</title>, with an accompaniment of two Violins, Viola, and Violoncello.  The first, in C minor,<note place="foot">
<p>
P. bk. 257 p. 4.
</p>
</note> has an antique flavour. But the second, in C major,<note place="foot">
<p>
P. bk. 256 p. 4.
</p>
</note> is as fresh as if it had been written yesterday.<note place="foot">
<p>
There are, in fact, three Concertos for two Claviers and Orchestra: two in C minor and one in C major.  Forkel refers to only one of the former and regards it as antiquated by comparison with the one in C major.  Spitta (iii. 144) attributes the C major to 1730.  Forkel's C minor in its original form was a Concerto for two Violins, now lost.  The other C minor Concerto is identical with the Concerto in D minor for two Violins and is in P. 257b. Spitta (iii. 138) dates it 1736. See Schweitzer, i. 413.
</p>
</note> It may be played without the String quartet and still sounds admirable.  The final Allegro is a majestic movement and strictly fugal.  Compositions of this form were first perfected, indeed, we may conjecture, were first attempted, by Bach.  At least, I have met with only a single example by another composer that may perhaps be older&mdash;namely, Pachelbel of N&uuml;rnberg's Toccata, as he called it.  Pachelbel, however, was a contemporary of Bach and may have taken the idea from him.  However, his work is not worth considering.  One instrument merely repeats the other's phrases without being at all concertante.  It almost seems as if Bach at this period had made up his mind to discover what could be done with any number of parts. Having already written for a
<pb n="132" />
single solo instrument music which required no accompaniment, he next experimented in dividing his material between as large a number of solo instruments as possible.  Hence the Concertos for two Claviers were followed by
</item>

<item>5. <title>Two Concertos for three Claviers</title> with an accompaniment of Strings.<note place="foot">
<p>
In D minor and C major (P. bks. 258, 259).  The tradition is that Bach wrote these two Concertos in order to play them with his elder sons.  Spitta (iii. 144) finds the tradition trustworthy.  Hence the two works must have been written by c. 1733 at latest, before the sons left home.  See also Schweitzer, i. 414.
</p>
</note> These Concertos present a remarkable characteristic: besides the concertante combination of three Claviers, the stringed instruments also have concertante parts distinct from the accompaniment.  It is difficult to realise the art involved in this achievement.  For, in spite of their technical skill, the two works are so delicate, full of character, and expressive, that the composer might be treating a simple melody (note particularly the Concerto in D minor).  Words are inadequate to express the admiration they arouse.  But Bach was not satisfied.  Hence he wrote
</item>

<item>6. <title>A Concerto for four Claviers</title> and four stringed instruments.<note place="foot">
<p>
In A minor (P. bk. 260).  This is not an original composition, but is an arrangement by Bach of a Vivaldi Concerto for four Violins.  Spitta (iii. 149) assigns it to the same period as the Concertos for three Claviers, c. 1733.  See B.G. XLIII. (1) <foreign lang="la">infra.</foreign>
</p>
</note> I cannot judge the effect of this composition, for I have never been able to get together the four instruments and four performers 
<pb n="133" />
it requires.  But that it is admirably written can be seen from the parts.
</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">III. Compositions For The Organ</head>
<p>
The pedal is the distinctive feature of the Organ which places it above all other instruments, and gives it its magnificence, sonority, and majesty.  Deprive it of the pedal and you take from it the solemn and imposing tones which are its distinctive utterance, reducing it to the level of a <q>positiv,</q> or Chamber-organ, an instrument relatively insignificant.
</p>
<p>
But an Organ equipped with a pedal must be able to employ it in its full compass,<note place="foot">
<p>
The pedal on the small German Organ had only the compass of an octave.
</p>
</note> and both composer and organist must know the proper use of it.  No one excelled Bach in this knowledge.  Not only is his rich harmony and melody singularly adapted to the instrument, but he gave the pedal a part of its own, even in his early compositions.  Yet it was only gradually that he mastered its technique; for his Organ masterpieces belong to the period in which those for the Clavier began to be classics.  His early and immature Organ works are widely dispersed; for as soon as a composer begins to be distinguished everybody is anxious to possess a specimen of his art.  Public curiosity, however, generally dies down long before a composer comes to maturity,
<pb n="134" />
particularly if his work is over the heads of the public.  And this seems to have been Bach's fortune.  Consequently his mature Organ works are less familiar than his early efforts.  The latter, however, cannot possibly be admitted to a <q>correct and critical</q> edition of his works, and I mention here only those whose merit is as incontestable as that of the Clavier works enumerated in the preceding paragraphs.
</p>
<p>
Bach's finest Organ music falls into three groups:
</p>

<list>
<item>1. <title>The Great Preludes and Fugues</title>, with obbligato pedal.  Their number cannot be stated, but I believe it not to exceed a dozen.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Great Preludes and Fugues are, with one exception, in B.G. XV.  The Prelude and Fugue in E flat was published by Bach in the third Part of the <title>Clavier&uuml;bung.</title>  Its Fugue is known as the <q>St. Anne's.</q>
</p>
</note> At least, after prolonged search I have not been able to collect more than that number.<note place="foot">
<p>
From the figures printed by Forkel the twelve can be identified as follows (the references in parentheses are to the Novello edition of Bach's Organ works):
</p>
<list>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in C minor, the <q>Great</q> (bk. vii. 64).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in A minor, (bk. vii. 42).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in G major, (bk. viii. 112).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in E minor, (bk. viii. 98).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in B minor, (vii. 52).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in C major, (bk. ix. 156).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in D minor, (bk. ix. 150).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in C major (bk iii. 70).</item>
<item>Tocatta and Fugue in D minor (bk. x. 196).</item>
<item>Tocatta and Fugue in F major (bk. ix. 176).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in G minor (bk. viii. 120).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in E minor (bk. ii. 44).</item>
</list>

</note> To these I must add a very clever and original Passacaglia, which,
<pb n="135" />
however, seems suitable rather for a two-manual Clavicembalo and pedal than for the Organ.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Passacaglia in C minor (Novello bk. 10 p. 214) was written originally for the Clavicembalo and pedal.  It belongs to the later Weimar period, 
<foreign lang="la">i.e. circ.</foreign> 1715.  See Spitta, i. 588 and Schweitzer, i. 280.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>2. <title>Preludes on Choral Melodies</title>. It was at Arnstadt that Bach began to compose Variations on Choral melodies, under the title <title>Partite diverse.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
They are all printed in Novello bk. 19, and are three in number, on the melodies <q>Christ, der du bist der helle Tag</q>, <q>O Gott, du frommer Gott,</q> and <q>Sei gegr&uuml;sset, Jesu g&uuml;tig.</q>  The pedal is only required in one movement of the first, in none of the second, and considerably in the third.  Without question all three date from Bach's earliest period, but whether they were written at Arnstadt or L&uuml;neburg cannot be stated.
</p>
</note> Most of them can be played on the manuals alone.  Those which I include here are an exception and require the obbligato pedal.  Their number may amount to one hundred.  I myself possess above seventy, and more survive elsewhere.<note place="foot">
<p>
The fullest collection of these miscellaneous Organ Choral Preludes is in B.G. XL. Not counting variant readings they number fifty-two, besides two fragments and thirteen of doubtful authenticity, of which two are sets of Variations.  The Novello edition contains fifty-two in bks. 18 and 19.  To these must be added the <q>Eighteen</q> Preludes on Choral Melodies, which Forkel nowhere mentions, as well as the third Part of the <title>Clavier&uuml;bung,</title> the <title>Sch&uuml;bler Chorals,</title> and the Variations on <title>Vom Himmel hoch,</title> to which he has already made reference in the first section of this chapter.  As he does not mention it specifically, it is to be inferred that Forkel was ignorant of the existence of the <title>Orgelb&uuml;chlein</title>; otherwise he could hardly have failed to introduce it in this section.  All Bach's Choral Preludes, miscellaneous and in collections made by himself, are in Novello's edition, bks. 15-19.  A useful key to their melodies is provided by bk. 20.  For more detailed information see Terry, <title>Bach's Chorals,</title> Part III.
</p>
</note> No other Choral Preludes approach them in religious feeling, dignity, and sublimity of expression.  I cannot notice them individually; they are too numerous. Besides the larger, there is a great number of shorter and easier ones, particularly useful for young players.  MSS. of them exist in considerable number.<note place="foot">
<p>
The large number of MSS. of many of the miscellaneous Preludes is made evident in the introduction to B.G. XL.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>3. <title>Six Sonatas</title>, or Trios, for two manuals and an obbligato pedal.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Sonatas in E flat major, C minor, and D minor are in N. bk. 4; E minor, C major, G major in N. bk. 5.
</p>
</note> Bach wrote them for his eldest son, Wilhelm Friedemann, whom they helped to become the great performer he was when I knew him.  It is impossible to overpraise their beauty.  Bach composed them when he was in the full vigour of his powers, and they may be considered his <foreign lang="fr">chef d'oeuvre</foreign> in this form.<note place="foot">
<p>
The so-called <q>Sonatas</q> were actually written for a Clavicembalo with two manuals and a pedal.  Bach's Autograph of them belonged to his second son and an earlier copy of them to Wilhelm Friedemann.  Both are now in the Berlin Royal Library.  Friedemann went to Dresden as Organist in 1733 and Spitta is of opinion that the whole of the six Sonatas were in existence by or soon after 1727.  If so, they must be regarded as the outcome of Bach's early years at Leipzig.  See Spitta, iii. 212 ff. and Schweitzer, i. 278.
</p>
</note> He also wrote other Organ Sonatas, the MSS. of which are in various collections.  They are fine compositions, though they do not equal the Six in merit.<note place="foot">
<p>
None are extant.  Spitta, iii. 213 n., conjectures that Forkel refers to the Trios in D minor and C minor (N. bks. 2 p. 54, 12 p. 108) and the Pastorale in F major (N. bk. 12 p. 102.) His incomplete knowledge of the Organ works is revealed by Appendix V. <foreign lang="la">infra.</foreign>
</p>
</note>
</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">IV. Instrumental Music</head>
<p>
There are few instruments for which Bach did not write.  In his day it was usual to play a Concerto or instrumental Solo during the Communion office.<note place="foot">
<p>
This is a pure conjecture and Schweitzer scouts it (i. 416 n.).
</p>
</note> Bach composed many of these pieces himself, and always with a view to their improving the technique of the player.  Most of them are lost.  But two important works of another kind survive and to some extent compensate us.  They are:
</p>
<list>
<item>1. Six Solos for Violin, unaccompanied.<note place="foot">
<p>
The oldest copy of them dates from circ. 1720; they belong therefore to the late C&ouml;then period.  The 1720 MS. is in A. M. Bach's handwriting and was discovered in 1814 at Petrograd among old papers about to be sent away to a butter dealer.  The Sonatas are in P. bk. 228.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>2. Six Solos for Violoncello, unaccompanied.<note place="foot">
<p>
They also date from the C&ouml;then period and are in P. bk. 238a, 238b.
</p>
</note> The Violin Solos have long been considered by
the finest players to be the best instructor for the instrument. The Violoncello Solos are equally effective.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel omits to mention the Brandenburg Concertos (P. bks. 261-266); the Overtures in C major (P. bk. 267), B minor (P. bk. 268), D major (P. bk. 269), D major (P. bk. 2068); and the Violin Concertos in A minor (P. bk. 229), E major (P. bk. 230), and (for two Violins) in D minor (P. bk. 231). In B.G. XXI. (1) is a Symphonic movement, in D major, for Violin and orchestra.  A Sinfonia in F major (B.G. XXXI. 96) is another version of the first Brandenburg Concerto.  The Clavier Concertos have been mentioned <foreign lang="la">supra.</foreign>
</p>
</note>
</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">V. Vocal Music</head>
<list>
<item>1. Five complete sets of church Cantatas for the Sundays and Festivals of the year.<note place="foot">
<p>The set of five is complete only for Christmas Day, Feast of the Circumcision, Whitsunday (one of the five is of doubtful authenticity), Purification of the B.V.M., and Feast of St. Michael the Archangel.  See Terry, <title>Bach's Chorals,</title> Part II. 2 ff.
</p>
</note></item>

<item>2. Five compositions for Holy Week, one of which is for double chorus.<note place="foot">
<p>
In giving the number of <title>Passions</title> as five, Forkel repeats the statement of the <title>Nekrolog.</title>  The number corresponds with the five sets of Church Cantatas which Bach is known to have written.  It is, however, exceedingly doubtful whether Bach wrote more than four <title>Passions.</title>  Only those according to St. Matthew and St. John have come down to us from C. P. E. Bach, who was left the Autographs of both by his father.  The <title>St. John Passion</title> was first performed in 1724 and the <title>St. Matthew Passion</title> in 1729. Picander, Bach's librettist, certainly wrote two other Passion texts, one of which was written for Good Friday 1725, and the second, based on St. Mark's Gospel, was actually performed at St. Thomas', Leipzig, on Good Friday 1731.  Spitta (ii. 505) gives good reason to hold that Bach's music for this Passion was adapted from the <title>Trauer-Ode,</title> which he had written in 1727 in memory of Queen Christiane Eberhardine.  But of the 1725 <title>Passion</title> there is no trace.  If it ever existed, its loss probably may be assigned to Wilhelm Friedemann's carelessness, to whom presumably it was assigned in the division of Bach's property after his death.  But even so, we have no more than four <title>Passions.</title> There exists, however, a fifth <title>Passion according to St. Luke,</title> which is undoubtedly in Bach's Autograph, and which Spitta is inclined to attribute to Bach himself.  It is published by Breitkopf and Haertel, but is generally regarded as being by another composer than Bach, who probably copied it for use at Leipzig.  On the whole matter see Spitta, ii. 504 ff., Schweitzer, chap. xxvi., and the Bach-Jahrbuch for 1911 (Publications of the New Bachgesellschaft XII. (2)).
</p>
</note></item>


<item>3. Several Oratorios,<note place="foot">
<p>
Other than the <title>Passions,</title> the only Oratorios are the <title>Christmas Oratorio</title>, (1734), the <title>Easter Oratorio</title> (c. 1736), and <title>Ascension Oratorio</title> (c. 1735).
</p>
</note> Masses,<note place="foot">
<p>
Besides the B minor Mass (1733-? 38) Bach wrote four miscalled <q>short</q> Masses, in F major, A major, G minor, and G major.  They all belong to the Leipzig period (c. 1739).
</p>
</note> a <title>Magnificat,</title>
settings of the Sanctus,<note place="foot">
<p>
Besides the setting of the Sanctus in the B minor Mass there are four detached settings, in C major, D major, D minor, and G major.  Of these only that in D major is probably by Bach (c. 1723).
</p>
</note> compositions for birthdays and Saints' Days,<note place="foot">
<p>
The music for Saints' Days is included in the church Cantatas.  For the Birthday Odes see <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, Chap. IIA.
</p>
</note> funerals,<note place="foot">
<p>
Besides the <title>Trauer-Ode,</title> three or four of the church Cantatas and certainly three of the Motets were written for funerals.  See Terry, op. cit., pp. 24, 44.
</p>
</note> marriages,<note place="foot">
<p>
Among the church Cantatas there are at least five for use at weddings.  Bach wrote also three secular wedding Cantatas: <title>Weichet nur, betr&uuml;bte Schatten</title> (c. 1730); <title>O holder Tag</title> (11749); the third (1728) has disappeared.
</p>
</note> and some Italian Cantatas.<note place="foot">
<p>
Two Italian Cantatas&mdash;<title>Amore traditore</title> and <title>Non sa che sia dolore</title>&mdash;have come down to us.  A third, <title>Andro dall colle al prato,</title> is lost.  See B.G. XI. (ii.), XXIX.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>4. Several Motets for single and double chorus.<note place="foot">
<p>
Only six are genuine. See <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>, p. 141.
</p>
</note>
</item>
</list>

<p>
Most of these works are now dispersed.  The Church Cantatas were divided between his elder sons after their composer's death.  Wilhelm Friedemann had the larger share because, being organist at Halle, he could make use of them.  Later, circumstances compelled him to part with them gradually.  I know of no other collection of Bach's larger choral works.  There exist, however, eight or ten Motets for double chorus, but they are dispersed in various hands.<note place="foot">
<p>
Of the Motets that have come down to us as his, only six are Bach's.  Forkel mentions five of them in secs. 7 and 3 of the next paragraph; he omits <title>Lobet den Herrn, alle Heiden.</title>  In 1802-3 Breitkopf and Haertel published six Motets&mdash;the five mentioned by Forkel and another, <title>Ich lasse dich nicht,</title> of which Bach made a copy, but whose composer actually was Johann Christoph Bach.  We know that Bach composed at least one Latin Motet for double chorus, and Friedemann's share of his father's autographs may have contained it and others known to Forkel but no longer extant.
</p>
</note> In the collection
bequeathed by the Princess Amalia of Prussia to the Joachimsthal Gymnasium at Berlin there are some of Bach's vocal compositions.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Amalienbibliothek of the Joachimsthal Gymnasium, Berlin, contains one of the most important Bach collections, but it has long been superseded by the Royal Library there as the chief repository of Bach's Autographs.
</p>
</note>  Their number is not considerable, but among them are the following:
</p>

<list>
<item>1. Twenty-one Church Cantatas.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Amalienbibliothek has only one Autograph, namely, Cantata 34, <title>O ewiges Feuer.</title> The rest are early copies.
</p>
</note> In one of them, set to the words, <title>Schlage doch, gew&uuml;nschte Stunde,</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Cantata 53.  No Autograph of this Cantata exists, and the copies from which the B.G. edition was printed are in the Amalienbibliothek.
</p>
</note>
the composer introduces a bell obbligato.  From that fact we may conclude that the Cantata was not composed in the period of Bach's maturity,<note place="foot">
<p>
On the contrary, the Cantata belongs to the Leipzig period, 1723-34.
</p>
</note> for the use of bells is of doubtful taste.</item>

<item>2. Two Masses for five voices with instrumental accompaniment.<note place="foot">
<p>
None of the four <q>short</q> Masses is in five parts.  All have instrumental accompaniments.  The autograph scores of the Masses in A major and G major are in Messrs. Breitkopf and Haertel's possession.  Copies of the other two scores, in Altnikol's handwriting, are in the Berlin Royal Library.  See Introduction to B.G. VIII.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>3. A Mass for double chorus, the first being
<pb n="141" />
accompanied by Strings and the second by wind instruments.<note place="foot">
<p>
An eight-part Mass in G was performed at a Leipzig Gewandhaus Concert on March 7, 1805, and was published later in the year by Breitkopf and Haertel.  The score is admittedly, for the greater part of the work, in Bach's hand and is in the Berlin Royal Library.  The publication of the work was under consideration by the Bachgesellschaft in 1858.  That it is not by Bach is generally held.  It has been attributed to Johann Ludwig Bach (d. 1741).  See Genealogical Table II.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>4. A <title>Passion,</title> for double Chorus,<note place="foot">
<p>
The <title>St. Matthew Passion.</title>
</p>
</note> the text by Picander.<note place="foot">
<p>
A <foreign lang="fr">nom de plume</foreign> for Christian Friedrich Henrici (1700-64), who wrote a large number of Bach's Leipzig texts.
</p>
</note></item>

<item>5. A <title>Sanctus,</title> for four voices and instrumental accompaniment.<note place="foot">
<p>
Perhaps Forkel indicates the short <title>Sanctus</title> in Richter's edition of the <title>Choralges&auml;nge</title>, No. 123, or that in B.G. XLI. p. 177.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>6. A Motet, for four voices, <title>Aus tiefer Noth schrei ich zu dir.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
This is the first Chorus of Cantata No. 38.  It is printed as a separate Motet in Erk, No. 150.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item>7. A Motet for five voices, <title>Jesu, meine Freude.</title></item>

<item>8. Four Motets, for eight voices in double chorus:
<list>
<item>(a) <title>F&uuml;rchte dich nicht, ich bin dei dir.</title></item>
<item>(b) <title>Der Geist hilft unserer Schwachheit auf.</title></item>
<item>(c) <title>Komm, Jesu, komm.</title></item>
<item>(d) <title>Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's list is complete except for <title>Lobet den Herrn, alle Heiden.</title>
</p>
</note>
</item>
</list>
</item>

<item>9. A detached four-part fugal chorus, <title>Nimm was dein ist, und gehe hin.</title><note place="foot">
<p>
The opening Chorus of Cantata 144.
</p>
</note>
</item>
<pb n="142" />
<item>10. A bucolic Cantata, with Recitatives, Aria, Duet, and Chorus.  A note is prefixed to it.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel refers to the <title>Peasant Cantata,</title> or <title>Mer hahn en neue Oberkeet,</title> performed on August 30, 1742.  Forkel clearly was not familiar with Bach's other secular Cantatas.  See B.G. XI. (ii.), XX. (ii.), XXIX.  The Autograph score of the Peasant Cantata is in the Berlin Royal Library.
</p>
</note>
<p>
On the MS. of the last-named Cantata and of the Mass for double chorus (No. 3 
<foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>) there is a note by Kirnberger analysing the skill and merit of the compositions.
</p>
</item>
</list>
</div>

</div>

<pb n="143" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER X.  BACH'S MANUSCRIPTS</head>
<p>
It has been remarked more than once that Bach, throughout his life, devoted much thought to the improvement of his compositions.  I have had frequent occasion to compare the original and subsequent texts of his works, and confess to have experienced both surprise and pleasure in observing his care to improve whatever he thought faulty, to make good better, and better perfect.  Nothing is more instructive than a collation of this kind, whether to the experienced musician or the instructed amateur.  I should like to see a supplement to the complete edition of Bach's works showing these variant readings.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's suggestion was carried out, with varying thoroughness, in the Bachgesellschaft edition.
</p>
</note> The collation would be in the highest degree instructive, and to attempt it is as appropriate to the works of the composer, a poet in sound, as to those of the poet in words.
</p>
<p>
In Bach's early texts he often repeats a phrase to other words with some melodic variety, in a 
<pb n="144" />
lower or even in the same octave.  In his riper experience he could not tolerate such poverty of workmanship, and cut out these passages remorselessly, without regard for the number and quality of the persons who had approved them in their original state.  There occur to me two good examples of this, the C major and C sharp minor Preludes in the first part of the <title>Well-tempered Clavier.</title> Bach revised them so drastically as to cut them down by one-half, sacrificing passages that he thought redundant.<note place="foot">
<p>
Forkel's judgment is at fault.  See Schweitzer, i. 336.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
In other places Bach tends to be over-concise; he expresses an idea, but does not fully develop it.  The best illustration that occurs to me is the D minor Prelude in the second part of the <title>Well-tempered Clavier.</title>  I possess several texts of it.  In the oldest the first transposition of the theme in the Bass and several other details essential to a complete development of the idea are wanting.  A second MS. gives the theme to the Bass wherever the latter is in a key nearly related to that of the tonic.  In a third MS. these addenda are developed more fully and are joined more skilfully.  But melodic details are present of doubtful relevance to the rest of the composition.  In a fourth MS. these disappear or are amended, so that, as we have it, the Prelude stands as one of the most beautiful and least faulty in the <title>Well-tempered Clavier.</title> Many people, no doubt, 
<pb n="145" />
preferred the movement in its original form.  But Bach was not a man to be influenced by approbation or criticism.  He went on correcting until he satisfied himself.
</p>
<p>
In the early part of the seventeenth century it was the fashion in instrumental music to overload single notes with ornaments and add florid runs.  Lately it has become the fashion to do so in vocal music as well.  That Bach shared this disposition may be inferred from certain pieces that he wrote in this style.  An instance is the Prelude in E minor in the first part of the <title>Well-tempered Clavier.</title>  But he soon returned to his natural better taste, and altered the movement to the form in which it is engraved.<note place="foot">
<p>
Also in Wilhelm Friedemann's <title>Clavierb&uuml;chlein.</title>  See Schweitzer, i. 279; Spitta, ii. 166.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Every decade has its own style of melody, distinctive of itself and evanescent.  A composer must carefully avoid it if he hopes to be listened to by posterity.  In his young days even Bach ran upon this rock.  His early compositions for the Organ, and the two-part <title>Inventions</title> in their original form, are full of <foreign lang="it">fiorituri</foreign> such as the taste of his period approved.  His Organ compositions remain comparatively untouched, but the <title>Inventions</title> he closely revised.  The public will soon be able to compare them in their first and later forms, as the publishers, with admirable spirit, have resolved to discontinue the present edition
<pb n="146" />
and to send out to subscribers a revised one based on Bach's corrected text.
</p>
<p>
Bach's processes of revision so far mentioned, however, merely correct faults of form, that is, diffuseness or incomplete development of a musical thought.  But Bach employed other methods which are less easy to describe because they are more subtle.  He often rivets the style and character of a piece by changing a single note, strictly correct grammatically and yet disagreeable to an artist such as himself.  Even commonplace passages he could convert into phrases of beauty by the addition or alteration of a single note.  Only the most sensitive taste and trained experience can decide in such cases, and Bach possessed both in the highest perfection.  He developed them to such a pitch, indeed, that his brain eventually rejected any idea which, in all its properties and relations, did not accord inevitably and naturally with the whole composition.  Consequently his later works display such consistency of merit that all of them seem to have been cast complete in a mould, so smooth, facile and abundant is the flow of his rich fancy.  It is on the highest summits of the art that harmony and melody find their ideal union, and as yet Bach dwells there in majestic isolation.
</p>
</div>

<pb n="147" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>CHAPTER XI. THE GENIUS OF BACH</head>
<p>
It is surely unnecessary to ask whether that artist is a genius who, in every form of his art, has produced masterpiece after masterpiece, of an originality which sets them above the achievements of all other ages, distinguished also by a wealth of originality and agreeableness that enslaves every hearer.  The most fertile fancy, invention inexhaustible, a judgment so nice as to reject intuitively every irrelevant and jarring detail, unerring ingenuity in employing the most delicate and minute resources of his art, along with an unrivalled technique&mdash;these qualities, whose expression demands the outpouring of a man's whole soul, are the signboards of genius.  The man who cannot find them in Bach's music either is not acquainted with it at all or knows it imperfectly.  One needs to be steeped in it thoroughly to appreciate the genius of its author.  For the greater the work the closer study is demanded for its apprehension.  The butterfly method, a sip here and there, is of little use.  But admirable as were the gifts Bach received
<pb n="148" />
from nature, he could never have become an accomplished genius had he not learned betimes to avoid the rocks on which many artists, some of them perhaps not less gifted than he, too often founder.  I will communicate to the reader some scattered thoughts on the subject and conclude this essay with an indication of the characteristics of Bach's genius.
</p>
<p>
Even the largest natural gifts, coupled with the strongest propensity for a particular art, offer no more than fruitful soil on which that art may thrive by patient cultivation.  Industry, the true begetter of every art and science, is an indispensable factor.  Not only does it enable genius to master technique, but it stimulates the critical and reflective faculties also.  The very ease with which genius acquires and applies the apparatus of musical composition frequently entices it to leap over root principles in its plunge into deeper waters, or to fly before its wings are grown.  In such a case, unless genius is guided back to neglected fundamentals and forced to build itself upon the great examples of the past, it will inevitably expend its treasure uselessly and never attain to its promised dimensions.  For it is an axiom, that real progress can never be made, nor the highest perfection be attained, if the foundations are insecure.  If arduous heights are to be achieved, the easier obstacles must first be approached and overcome.  Guided by his own 
<pb n="149" />
inexperience no one ever can hope to become great.  He must profit by the practice and example of others.
</p>
<p>
Bach did not founder on this rock.  His soaring genius attended an equally ardent industry which incessantly impelled him, whenever he found his own equipment insufficient, to seek guidance from others.  Vivaldi and his Concertos were the first from whom he sought counsel.  From them he turned to the principal Organ and Clavier composers of the period.  Nothing is more intellectually stimulating than counterpoint, and the composers Bach studied were distinguished by their mastery of it, as their fugal writing attests.  Hence Bach's diligent study and imitation of them pointed his taste and imagination to perceive wherein himself was lacking and what steps were needed to take him farther in his art.
</p>
<p>
A second rock upon which genius often comes to grief is the public's undiscriminating applause.  To be sure, I do not undervalue public approval or commend without reserve the remark of a Greek teacher to his pupil, <q>You performed badly, otherwise the audience would not have applauded you.</q>  Yet it is none the less true that many artists are thrown off their balance by exaggerated and often unmerited plaudits, particularly in their early careers before they have acquired self-discipline and sound judgment.  The public merely asks for what it can understand, whereas the true
<pb n="150" />
artist ought to aim at an achievement which cannot be measured by popular standards.  How, then, can popular applause be reconciled with the true artist's aspirations towards the ideal?  Bach never sought applause, and held with Schiller:
</p>
<q rend="display">
Kannst du nicht allen gefallen durch deine That und dein Kunstwerk,<lb/>
Mach' es wenigen recht; vielen gefallen ist schlimm.<note place="foot">
<p>
<q>Since you cannot please everybody by your actions and work, strive at least to satisfy a few; popular appreciation encourages bad art.</q>&mdash;Schiller's <title> Votiftafeln</title>
</p>
</note>
</q>
<p>
Like every true artist, Bach worked to please himself in his own way, obeying the summons of his own genius, choosing his own subjects, and finding satisfaction only in the approval of his own judgment.  He could count on the applause of all who understood good music, and never failed to receive it.  Under what other conditions can sound works of art emerge?  The composer who debases his muse to the popular mood either lacks real genius or, having it, abuses it.  For to catch the ear of the public is not a difficult task and merely connotes an agreeable facility.  Composers of that class are like artisans who frankly fashion their goods to suit their market.  But Bach never condescended to such artifices.  The artist, in his judgment, is the dictator of public taste, not its slave.  If, as often happened, he was asked to write something simple for the Clavier
<pb n="151" />
he would answer, <q>I will do what I can.</q>  He would choose an easy theme.  But when he began to develop it he always found so much to say that the piece soon became anything but simple.  If his attention was drawn to the fact, he would answer smilingly, <q>Practise it well and you will find it quite easy.  You have as many good fingers on each hand as I have.</q>  Nor was he prompted in this by mere contradictoriness, but exhibited the true artist spirit.
</p>
<p>
It was, in fact, the artist temperament that led Bach to make the great and sublime his goal.  For that reason his music is not merely agreeable, like other composers', but transports us to the regions of the ideal.  It does not arrest our attention momentarily but grips us the stronger the oftener we listen to it, so that after a thousand hearings its treasures are still unexhausted and yield fresh beauties to excite our wonder.  Even the beginner who knows but the A B C of his art warms with pleasure when he hears Bach's music and can open his ear and heart to it.  It was the true artist spirit, too, that guided Bach to unite majesty and grandeur of design with meticulous care for detail and the most refined elegance, characteristics which we rather seek, perhaps, in works whose object is merely to give pleasure.  Bach held strongly that if the strands are imperfect, the whole design is faulty.  His genius is sublime and impressive, and he never 
<pb n="152" />
condescends to be frivolous even when he touches the lighter forms of art.
</p>
<p>
To conclude: it was the union of astounding genius and indefatigable application that enabled Bach to widen at every point the domain of musical expression.  His successors have failed to maintain the art at the level to which he raised it.  If Bach was more successful, if he was able to produce great work of convincing beauty and imperishable as a model for those who came after him, we owe it as much to his application as to his genius.
</p>
<p>
This man, the greatest orator-poet that ever addressed the world in the language of music, was a German!  Let Germany be proud of him!  Yes, proud of him, but worthy of him too!
</p>

<figure url="images/statue2.jpg" rend="page-float:'ht'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<head>The Bach Statue at Leipzig</head>
<figDesc>The Bach Statue at Leipzig</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>
</body>

<back>
<pb n="153" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>APPENDIX I. CHRONOLOGICAL CATALOGUE OF BACH'S COMPOSITIONS</head>

<div>
<head type="sub">I. CATALOGUE OF BACH'S COMPOSITIONS PRIOR TO HIS APPOINTMENT TO WEIMAR IN JUNE 1708, in his twenty-fourth year.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Cantatas are classified under Appendix II.
</p>
</note>
</head>

<div>
<head type="sub2">VOCAL:&mdash;</head>
<p>
Motet: Lobet den Herrn, alle Heiden. 
</p>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">CLAVIER<note place="foot">
<p>
The references are to Peters' edition.  Excepting bk. 1959, which contains pieces of doubtful authenticity, every number printed by Peters is entered in the Chronological Catalogue.
</p>
</note>:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Capriccio sopra la lontananza del suo fratello dilettissimo (bk. 208 p. 62) (1704).</item>
<item>Capriccio in honorem Joh. Christoph Bachii, Ohrdruf (bk. 216 p. 34) (c. 1704).</item>
<item>Sonata in D major (bk. 215 p. 44) (c. 1704).<note place="foot">
<p>
There are three other Sonatas, in A minor, C major, D minor, none of which is an original composition.  They are printed in P. bk. 213.  The first and second are adaptations of material in Reinken's <title>Hortus Musicus.</title>  The third is a transcription of the second Solo Sonata for Violin.
</p>
</note>
</item>
</list>
<p>
B.G. XXXVI. prints a number of pieces which, in general, may be assigned to Bach's immature years. They are reproduced in Peters' edition:
</p>
<list>
<item>Book 200:
<list>
<item>Fughetta in C minor (p. 10).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fughetta in D minor (p. 40).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fughetta in E minor (p. 42).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fughetta in A minor (p. 47).</item>
<pb n="153" />
<item>Fugue in C major (p. 54).</item>
<item>Fugue in C major (p. 56).</item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Book 207:
<list>
<item>Fantasia in C minor (p. 50).</item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Book 212:
<list>
<item>Fantasia in C minor (p. 58).</item>
<item>Fugue in D minor (p. 59).</item>
<item>Fugue in D minor (p. 61).</item>
<item>Fugue in E minor (p. 68).</item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Book 214:
<list>
<item>Prelude and Fughetta in F major (p. 76).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fughetta in G major (p. 78).</item>
<item>Prelude in G major (p. 80). </item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Book 215: Three Minuets (p. 62).</item>
</list>
<p>
To these may be added (? authentic) from B.G. XLII.:
</p>
<list>
<item>Book 212:
<list>
<item>Fantasia and Fughetta in B flat major (p 58).</item>
<item>Do. do. D major (p. 60).</item>
</list>
</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Organ<note place="foot">
<p>
The references are to Novello's twelve Books of Bach's Organ Works, edited by J. F. Bridge and J. Higgs.  The edition is complete, and contains every movement included in Alfred Dorffel's <q>Thematisohos Verzeichniss</q> (second edition, 1882) except his No. 24 on p. 72; Nos. 6 and 8 on page 85; the <q>Kleines harmonisches Labyrinth</q> (D&ouml;rffel, p. 88, tigs. 131-33), the genuineness of which is questioned by Spitta (ii. 43); and figs. 136-37 on p. 88.  The Novello edition also follows Rust, against Spitta's judgment, in printing the <q>Fantasia con Imitazione</q> (bk. 12 p. 71) as an Organ instead of as a Clavier piece.  Books 15-19 print the Choral Preludes.  See the Peters and Novello editions collated in Appendix V.
</p>
</note>:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in C minor (bk. 2 p. 48) (c. 1704).</item>
<item>Do. do. C major (bk. 8 p. 88) (? 1707).<note place="foot">
<p>
Printed as a <q>Toccata</q> in E major in B.G. XV. p. 276.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Short,</q> A minor (bk. 10 p. 208).</item>
<item>Fugue in C minor (bk. 12 p. 95) (c. 1704).</item>
<item>Do. C minor, on a theme by Legrenzi (bk. 10 p. 230) (c. 1708).</item>
<item>Do. B minor, on a theme by Corelli (bk. 3 p. 60).</item>
<item>Do. D major (bk. 12 p. 83).</item>
<item>Do. G major (bk. 12 p. 55).</item>
<item>Do. G major (bk. 12 p. 86).</item>
<item>Do. G minor (bk. 2 p. 41).</item>
<item>Prelude in A minor (bk. 10 p. 238) (by 1706).</item>
<item>Do. C major (bk. 12 p. 94).</item>
<pb n="155" />
<item>Fantasia and Fugue in A minor (bk. 12 p. 60).</item>
<item>Fantasias in 6 major (bk. 9 p. 168; bk. 12 p. 75).</item>
<item>Pastorale in F major (bk. 12 p. 102).</item>
<item>Choral Partita: Christ, der du bist der helle Tag (bk. 19 p. 36).</item>
<item>Do. O Gott, du frommer Gott (bk. 19 p. 44).</item>
<item>Do. Sei gegr&uuml;sset, Jesu g&uuml;tig (bk. 19 p. 55).</item>
</list>
<p>
Generally speaking, the Choral Preludes, other than those in the maturer collections made by Bach himself, may be regarded as youthful works (bks. 18, 19).
</p>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">II. Catalogue Of Bach's Compositions At Weimar, 1708-17, from his twenty-fourth to his thirty-third year.</head>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Vocal:&mdash;</head>

<list>
<item>Secular Cantata: Was mir behagt (1716), <emph>or</emph>, Verlockender G&ouml;tterstreit.</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Clavier:&mdash;</head>

<list>
<item>Sixteen Concertos after Vivaldi (bk. 217) (c. 1708-12).</item>
<item>Toccatas in D major (bk. 211 p. 28), G major (bk. 215 p. 19), D minor (bk. 210 p. 68), G minor (bk. 211 p. 4),  E minor (bk. 210 p. 23) (c. 1708-12).</item>
<item>Aria variata alia maniera Italiana (bk. 215 p. 12) (c. 1708-12).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in A minor (bk. 211 p. 14) (c. 1715).</item>
<item>Fugues in A major (bk. 215 pp. 52, 57).</item>
<item>Do. B minor (bk. 214 p. 48).</item>
<item>Do. A major (bk. 212 p. 66).</item>
<item>Do. A minor (bk. 212 p. 70).</item>
<item>Fantasia in G minor (bk. 215 p. 32).</item>
<item>Do. B minor (bk. 215 p. 41). (For Organ, N. bk. 12 p. 71.)</item>
<item>Do. D major (bk. 211 p. 28).</item>
<item>Do. A minor (bk. 215 p. 5) (c. 1710).</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Organ:&mdash;</head>

<list>
<item>Passacaglia and Fugue in C minor (bk. 10 p. 214).</item>
<item>Four Concertos after Vivaldi (bk. 11).</item>
<pb n="156" />
<item>Eight Short Preludes and Fugues (bk. 1).</item>
<item>Orgelb&uuml;chlein (bk. 15) (1717).</item>
<item>Aria in F major (bk. 12 p. 112).</item>
<item>Fantasia con Imitazione (bk. 12 p. 71).</item>
<item>Do. C major (bk. 12 p. 92).</item>
<item>Do. C minor (bk. 3 p. 57).</item>
<item>Trio in C minor (bk. 12 p. 108).</item>
<item>Do. D minor (bk. 2 p. 54).</item>
<item>Canzona in D minor (bk. 2 p. 34) (c. 1714).</item>
<item>Allabreve in D major (bk. 2 p. 26).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in C major (bk. 7 p. 74).</item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Short,</q> E minor (bk. 2 p. 44).</item>
<item>Do. do. D major (bk. 6 p. 10).</item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Great,</q> A minor (bk. 7 p. 42).</item>
<item>Do. do. A major (bk. 3 p. 64).</item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Great,</q> C minor (bk. 7 p. 64).</item>
<item>Do. do. F minor (bk. 6 p. 21).</item>
<item>Do. do. G major (bk. 7 p. 80).</item>
<item>Do. do. G minor (bk. 8 p. 120) (c. 1712).</item>
<item>Toccata and Fugue in D minor (bk. 6 p. 2).</item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Great,</q> C major (bk. 9 p. 137).</item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Great,</q> F major (bk. 9 p. 176).</item>
<item>Do. do. the Dorian, D minor (bk. 10 p. 196).</item>
<item>Fantasia and Fugue in C minor (bk. 3 p. 76).</item>
<item>Prelude in G major (bk. 2 p. 30).</item>
<item>Do. C major (bk. 12 p. 91).</item>
<item>Fugue, the <q>Short,</q> in G minor (bk. 3 p. 84).</item>
<item>Do. C major (bk. 12 p. 100).</item>
</list>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">III. Catalogue Of Bach's Compositions At C&ouml;then, 1717-23, from his thirty-third to his thirty-ninth year.</head>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Vocal:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Secular Cantata: Durchlaucht'ster Leopold (1717).</item>
<item>Do. Mit Gnaden bekr&ouml;ne der Himmel die Zeiten</item>
<item>(?1721). Do. Weichetnur, betr&uuml;bte Schatten (?1717-23).<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta (ii. 620, 718) mentions a Birthday Cantata written in 1717-1721(?), the title of which is lost.
</p>
</note></item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Clavier:&mdash;</head>

<list>
<item>Clavier-B&uuml;chlein vor Wilhelm Friedemann Bach (1720).</item>
<item>Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue (bk. 207 p. 4) (c. 1720-23).</item>
<item>Clavier-B&uuml;chlein vor A. M. Bachin (bk 1959) (1722).</item>
<item>The Well-tempered Clavier (Part i.) (bk. 2790a) (1722).</item>
<item>Six French Suites (bks. 202 and 2793) (c. 1722).</item>
<item>Six English Suites (bks. 203-4 and 2794-95) (before 1726).</item>
<item>Fantasia and Fugue in A minor (bk. 208 p. 50).</item>
<item>Fugue in A minor (bk. 207 p. 16) (B.G. III. p. 334).</item>
<item>Twelve Little Preludes and Six Preludes for Beginners (bks. 200 and 2791) (c. 1722).</item>
<item>Inventions and Symphonies (bks. 201 and 2792) (1723).</item>
<item>Toccatas in F sharp minor and C minor (bk. 210 pp. 30 and 40).</item>
<item>Suites in A minor, E flat major, E minor, F major, and F minor (fragment) (bk. 214 pp. 54,62, 68; bk. 215 p. 27; bk. 212 p. 84).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in E flat major (bk. 214 p. 40).</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Chamber<note place="foot">
<p>
The references are to Peters' edition.
</p>
</note>:&mdash;</head>

<list>
<item>Six Sonatas (Suites) for Violin Solo (bk. 228) (c. 1720).<note place="foot">
<p>
The D minor contains the famous Chaconne.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Six Sonatas (Suites) for Violoncello Solo (bk. 238a) (c. 1720).</item>
<item>Six Sonatas for Violin and Clavier (bks. 232-33-232a-33a).</item>
<item>Suite in A major for Violin and Clavier (bk. 236).</item>
<item>Four Inventions for Violin and Clavier (bk. 2957).</item>
<item>Sonata in E minor and Fugue in G minor for Violin and  Clavier (bk. 236) (?early work).</item>
<item>Six Sonatas for Flute and Clavier (bks. 234-35).</item>
<item>Sonata in C major for two Violins and Clavier (bk. 237).</item>
<item>Three Sonatas for Viol da Gamba and Clavier (bk. 239).</item>
<item>Sonata in G major for two Flutes and Clavier (bk. 239 p. 2).</item>
<item>Sonata in G major for Violin, Flute, and Clavier (bk. 237).</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Orchestral:<note place="foot">
<p>
The references are to Peters' edition. In the B.G. edition the Orchestral music is included in the Chamber Music volumes.
</p>
</note>&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Six Brandenburg Concertos (bks. 261-66) (1721).</item>
<item>Four Suites (Overtures) (bks. 267-69, 2068).<note place="foot">
<p>
Pirro, p. 228, holds that the first two (C major and B minor) were written at C&ouml;then and the last two (D major and D major) at Leipzig. Schweitzer (i. 402) regards it as not clear in which period the Overtures were written.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Three Concertos for Violin and Orchestra (bks. 229, 230).<note place="foot">
<p>
In A minor, E major, G major. The G major figures as the fourth Brandenburg (bk. 264) and as the Clavier Concerto in F major (bk. 248). The A minor and E major were also converted into Clavier Concerti (G minor and D major) (bks. 249, 251). The D minor Clavier Concerto (bk. 264) preserves a lost Violin Concerto in the same key, and the one in F minor (bk. 250) corresponds with a lost Violin Concerto in G minor (bks. 3068, 3069).
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Concerto in D minor for two Violins and Orchestra (bk. 231).<note place="foot">
<p>
Also arranged as a Concerto for two Claviers (C minor) in P. bk. 257b.
</p>
</note></item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Organ:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Prelude (Fantasia) and Fugue, the <q>Great,</q> in G minor (bk. 8 p. 127) (?1720).</item>
</list>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">IV. Catalogue Of Bach's Compositions At Leipzig, 1723-34, from his thirty-ninth to his fiftieth year.</head>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Vocal:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Magnificat in D (?1723).<note place="foot">
<p>
Bach wrote another Magnificat, the music of which is lost. See Spitta, ii. 374.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Sanctus in C major, D major (c. 1723), D minor, and G major (P. bk. 29b).<note place="foot">
<p>
All except the Sanctus in D major are of doubtful authenticity. See Schweitzer, ii. 328 and Spitta, iii. 41 n.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>St. John Passion (1723).</item>
<item>Trauer-Ode (1727).</item>
<item>St. Matthew Passion (1729).</item>
<item>Mass in B minor (1733-?1738).</item>
<item>Christmas Oratorio (1734).</item>
<item>Three Wedding Chorals (P. bk. 1654).</item>
<item>Motet: Jesu, meine Freude (1723).</item>
<item>Do. Der Geist hilft unsrer Schwachheit auf (1729).</item>
<item>Do. f&uuml;rchte dich nicht.</item>
<item>Do. Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied.</item>
<pb n="159" />
<item>Motet: Komm, Jesu, komm.</item>
<item>Secular Cantata: Der zufriedengestellte Aeolus (1725); also entitled Blast Larmen, ihr Feinden (1734).</item>
<item>Do. Vereinigte Zwietracht der wechselnden Saiten (1726), or, Auf schmetternde T&ouml;ne der muntern Trompeten (after 1733).</item>
<item>Do. Schwingt freudig euch empor; <emph>also entitled</emph> Die Freude reget sich, <emph>or</emph> Steigt freudig in die Luft (1726).</item>
<item>Do Entfernet euch, ihr heitern Sterne (1727; music lost).</item>
<item>Do. Vergn&uuml;gte Pleissenstadt (1728; music lost).</item>
<item>Do. Von der Vergn&uuml;gsamkeit, <emph>or</emph> Ich bin in mir vergn&uuml;gt (c. 1730).</item>
<item>Do. Weichet nur, betr&uuml;bte Schatten (c. 1730).</item>
<item>Do. Der Streit zwischen Phoebus und Pan 1731).</item>
<item>Do. Froher Tag, verlangte Stunden (1732; music lost).</item>
<item>Do. Schweigt stille (Coffee Cantata) (c. 1732).</item>
<item>Do. Herkules auf dem Scheidewege, <emph>or</emph> Die Wahl des Herkules (1733).</item>
<item>Do. T&ouml;net, ihr Pauken!  Erschallet, Trompeten (1733).</item>
<item>Do. Preise dein Gl&uuml;cke, gesegnetes Sachsen (1734).</item>
<item>Do. Schleicht, spielende Wellen (1734).</item>
<item>Do. Thomana sass annoch betr&uuml;bt (1734; music lost).</item>
<item>Graduation Cantata: Siehe, der H&uuml;ter Israels (music lost).</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Clavier:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Notenbuch vor Anna Magdalena Bach (bk. 1959) (1725).</item>
<item>Clavier&uuml;bung, Part I. containing the six Partitas, or German Suites (bks. 205-6 or 2796-97) (1731).</item>
</list>
</div>
<pb n="160" />

<div>
<head type="sub2">Orchestral:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Concertos in C major, C minor, and C minor for two Claviers and Orchestra (bks. 256, 257, 257b) (1727-36).<note place="foot">
<p>
The Concerto in C minor (P. bk. 257) is an arrangement of one for two Violins now lost. The third, also in C minor, is identical with the D minor Concerto for two Violins and is published in that key in the Peters edition.  The remaining Concerto, in C major, is the only one originally written for the Clavier.  See Schweitzer, i. 413.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Seven Concertos for Clavier and Orchestra (bks. 248-54) (1729-36).</item>
<item>Concerto in A minor for Violin, Flute, Clavier, and Orchestra (bk. 255) (c. 1730).<note place="foot">
<p>
The work is an amplification of the Prelude and Fugue in A minor, already catalogued among the Clavier works of the C&ouml;then period.  Schweitzer (i. 340) concludes that it was rearranged as an orchestral Concerto early in the thirties, when Bach needed Concertos for the Telemann Society's Concerts.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Concerto in A minor for four Claviers and Orchestra (bk. 260) (c. 1733).</item>
<item>Concertos in D minor and C major for three Claviers and Orchestra (bks. 258, 259) (c. 1733).</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>

<head type="sub2">Organ:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Prelude and Fugue, the Great, in G major (bk. 8 p. 112) (1724 or 1725).<note place="foot">
<p>
The scheme of the G major and C major Preludes and Fugues dates back to the Weimar period. See Spitta, iii. 208; Parry, p. 67.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Six Sonatas in E flat major, C minor, D minor, E minor, C major, G major (bks. 4 and 5) (1727-33).<note place="foot">
<p>
These so-called <q>Organ</q> Sonatas were written for the Pedal Clavicembalo.
</p>
</note></item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in C major (bk. 3 p. 70) (c. 1730).</item>
<item>Do. do. D minor (bk. 9 p. 150).</item>
</list>
</div>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">V. Catalogue Of Bach's Compositions At Leipzig, 1735-50, from his fifty-first year to his death.</head>
<div>
<head type="sub2">Vocal:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Ascension Oratorio (Cantata 11) (c. 1735).</item>
<item>Schemelli's Hymn-book (1736).</item>
<item>Easter Oratorio (c. 1736).</item>
<pb n="161" />
<item>Four Masses, in P major, A major (c. 1739), G minor, G major (c. 1739).</item>
<item>Secular Cantata: Angenehmes Wiederau (1737).</item>
<item>Do. Willkommen, ihr herrschenden G&ouml;tter der Erden (1738) (music lost).</item>
<item>Do. Mer hahn en neue Oberkeet (Peasant Cantata) (1742).</item>
<item>Do. O holder Tag (?1749), <emph>or</emph>, O angenehme Melodei.</item>
<item>Italian Cantata: Amore traditore.</item>
<item>Do. Andro dall' colle al prato (lost).</item>
<item>Do. Non sa che sia dolore.</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Clavier:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Clavier&uuml;bung, Part II. containing the Italian Concerto (bk. 207) and Partita in B minor (bk. 208) (1735).</item>
<item>Fantasia and Fugue in C minor (bk. 207 p. 50 and bk. 212 p. 88) (c. 1738).</item>
<item>Clavier&uuml;bung, Part III. containing the four Duetti (bk. 208) (1739).</item>
<item>Clavier&uuml;bung, Part IV. containing the Goldberg Variations (bk. 209) (c. 1742).</item>
<item>The Well-tempered Clavier, Part II. (bk. Ib or 2790b) (1744).</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Chamber:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>Sonata for Violin, Flute, and Clavier, in C minor (in the <q>Musical Offering</q>) (bk. 237 p. 3) (1747).</item>
<item>Three Partitas for the Lute (?1740).<note place="foot">
<p>
The Clavier Suites in E minor, E major, and C minor are arrangements of these, otherwise lost, Lute Partitas. See Schweitzer, i. 344.
</p>
</note></item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub2">Organ:&mdash;</head>
<list>
<item>The Catechism Choral Preludes (in Clavier&uuml;bung, Part III.)  (bk. 16) (1739).</item>
<item>Fugue in D minor (in ditto) (bk. 16 p. 49) (1739).</item>
<item>Prelude and Fugue in E flat major (in ditto) (bk. 6 p. 28) (1739).</item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Great,</q> in C major (bk. 9 p. 156).</item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Great,</q> in B minor (bk. 7 p. 52) (1727-36).</item>
<item>Do. do. the <q>Great,</q> in E minor (bk. 8 p. 98).</item>
<pb n="162" />
<item>Canonic Variations on <q>Vom Himmel hoch</q> (bk. 19) (1746).</item>
<item>The Sch&uuml;bler Choral Preludes (bk. 16) (c. 1747-50).</item>
<item>The Eighteen Choral Preludes (bk. 17) (c. 1747-50).</item>
<item>The Musical Offering (P. bk. 219) (1747).</item>
<item>The Art of Fugue (P. bk. 218) (1749).</item>
</list>
</div>
</div>
</div>

<pb n="163" />

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>APPENDIX II. THE CHURCH CANTATAS ARRANGED CHRONOLOGICALLY</head>
<p>
We have the statement of Carl Philipp Emmanuel Bach,<note place="foot">
<p>
In Mizler's <title>Nekrolog.</title>
</p>
</note> confirmed by Forkel,<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Supra</foreign>, p. 138.
</p>
</note> Bach's earliest biographer, that his father composed five Cantatas for every Sunday and Festival of the ecclesiastical year.  Concerted music was sung at Leipzig annually on forty-three Sundays and sixteen week-days.<note place="foot">
<p>
See the present writer's <title>Bach's Chorals,</title> Part II. p. 1.
</p>
</note> Bach therefore must have written at least 295 Cantatas.  Of this number he composed at least thirty before 1723.  Hence approximately 265 were written at Leipzig.  But Bach's fertility does not appear to have outlived the year 1744.  We have reason, therefore, to conclude that the 265 Leipzig Cantatas were written in the course of twenty-one years, that is, between 1723 and 1744.  To complete that number Bach must have composed a new Cantata every month, a surprising but demonstrable conclusion.
</p>
<p>
Of the 295 Cantatas only 202 have come down to us, three of them in an incomplete state.<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Ibid.</foreign>, p. 4.  Four more Cantatas, of doubtful authenticity, are published by the Bachgesellschaft, Jahrgang XLI.
</p>
</note> Of those written before 1723 the survivors are too scanty to indicate a rate of productivity.  But thereafter we have fuller materials for a calculation.  Bach, as Cantor, conducted his first Leipzig Cantata on May 30, 1723, and in the following sixteen months produced twenty-four Cantatas, at the 
<pb n="164" />
rate of more than one a month.<note place="foot">
<p>
See the Table of Cantatas set out in chronological order.
</p>
</note> Beginning at the New Year of 1725 he wrote eighteen Cantatas in nine months, some of which, however, may belong to the years 1726-7-8-9.  But even so, his monthly average seems to have been maintained.  For 1730 we have, perhaps, ten Cantatas.  For 1731 about twenty survive, of which half a dozen may belong to 1732, a deduction which still preserves Bach's steady average.  In 1735 he produced actually nineteen Cantatas between the New Year and the following November, though not all of them are positively dated.  Thereafter his activity is less certainly measured.  But from 1736 till the end of 1744 he composed fifty-three Cantatas, at the rate, that is, of at least six every year, without making allowance for Cantatas written and lost.
</p>
<p>
There are few phenomena in the record of art more extraordinary than this unflagging cataract of inspiration, in which masterpiece followed masterpiece with the monotonous periodicity of a Sunday sermon.  Its musical significance has been presented with illuminating exegesis by more than one commentator.  But its literary apparatus has captured little attention.  Yet Bach's task must have been materially eased or aggravated according as the supply of libretti was regular or infrequent, while the flow of his inspiration must have been governed by their quality.  Moreover, the libretto was the medium through which he offered the homage of his art to the service of God.  The subject therefore deserves attention.  However trivial, measured against the immensities of Bach's genius, the study will at least provide a platform from which to contemplate it.
</p>
<p>
At the outset the opinion may be hazarded that the provision of his weekly libretti caused Bach greater anxiety than the setting of them to music, a task which he accomplished with almost magical facility. It is 
<pb n="165" />
true that from the early part of the 18th century cycles of Cantata texts for the Church's year were not infrequently published.  Bach was in more or less intimate touch with the authors of four, perhaps five, printed collections of the kind.  But he used them with surprising infrequency.  Neumeister's published cycles provided him with seven libretti,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 18, 24, 28, 59, 61, 142, 160.
</p>
</note> Franck's with sixteen,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 31, 70, 72, 80, 132, 147, 152, 155, 161, 162, 163, 164, 166, 168, 185, 186 (part).
</p>
</note> Picander's with ten,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 145, 148 (part), 156, 157, 159, 171, 174, 188, 190 (one version), <title>Ehre sei Gott</title> (incomplete).
</p>
</note> Marianne von Ziegler's with nine,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 68, 74, 87, 103, 108, 128, 175, 176, 183.
</p>
</note> and Helbig's with two.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 47, 141.
</p>
</note> He took three libretti from the Bible,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 50, 191, 196.
</p>
</note> and the hymn-book furnished him with eleven more.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 4, 97, 100, 107, 112, 117, 118, 129, 137, 177, 192.
</p>
</note> But all these published sources together only account for fifty-eight texts.  Bach possessed only one book that could assist his own efforts at authorship&mdash;Paul Wagner's eight-volumed Hymn-book&mdash;whence he took the stanzas which decorate his Cantatas like jewels in the rare settings he gave them.  It was, therefore, mainly upon writers with whom he was brought into occasional or official contact that Bach depended for his texts.
</p>
<p>
At the beginning of his career Bach was thrown upon his inexperience.  His earliest libretti, consequently, are tentative and transitory in their construction.  His first Cantata was written at Arnstadt for the Easter Festival of 1704.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 15: <title>Denn du wirst meine Seele nichfc in der H&ouml;lle lassen.</title>
</p>
</note> The core of the libretto is a seven-stanzaed Easter song by an unknown poet, eked out by two passages of Scripture, a Excitativo, Aria, and a verse of a congregational hymn.  The Aria and Recitativo are the only original numbers of the libretto, and there is little
<pb n="166" />
doubt that Bach wrote them himself.<note place="foot">
<p>
The intimate personal note of the opening words of the Recitative&mdash;<q>Mein Jesus ware tot</q>&mdash;reveals him.
</p>
</note> But the whole libretto is stamped by his personality, and reveals the inveterate subjectivity of his religion.  For, disregarding the general message of the Festival, the libretto opens on the soul's personal longing for immortality and closes on its song of victory over death.  In construction it is archaic, a survival of traditions acquired from central and northern Germany through Bach's earlier residence at L&uuml;neburg and intercourse with Hamburg.<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta, i. 231.
</p>
</note>
</p>

<p>
Three years passed before Bach produced his next extant Cantata. In the interval, on 29th June 1707, he resigned his Arnstadt appointment to become organist of the Church of St. Blasius at M&uuml;hlhausen.<note place="foot">
<p>
Schweitzer, i. 103.
</p>
</note> Here, within the space of ten months, he produced three Cantatas, the uniform character of whose libretti points to local and transitory influence upon the composer.  The first of them,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 131: <title>Aus der Tiefe rufe ich, Herr, zu dir.</title>
</p>
</note> written in August 1707, is a setting of Psalm 130, with the addition of two hymn-stanzas.  The second<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 71: <title>Gott ist mein K&uuml;onig.</title>
</p>
</note> was performed on 4th February 1708, at the inauguration of the M&uuml;hlhausen Town Council, and consists of Old Testament passages, a verse of a hymn, and three original stanzas.  The third,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 196: <title>Dorr Herr denket an uns.</title>
</p>
</note> a wedding Cantata, was performed at Dornheim, near Arnstadt, on 5th June 1708, at the marriage of Pastor Johann Lorenz Stauber to Frau Bach's aunt, and is set to four verses of Psalm 115.
</p>
<p>
We can have little doubt regarding the authorship of these singularly austere libretti, so far removed in atmosphere from those of Bach's subsequent periods.  In fact, the clue is furnished by Bach himself.  A note in his handwriting on the score of the first of the three
<pb n="167" />
Cantatas (No. 131) states that he composed it at the request of Georg Christian Eilmar.  The man was a close friend, godfather of Bach's eldest daughter, Katharina Dorothea (b. 1708), chief pastor of the Church of the Blessed Virgin, and Consistorial Assessor, at M&uuml;hlhausen.  He was, moreover, an aggressive foe of Pietism, of which M&uuml;hlhausen was the citadel, and Bach's minister, Frohne, the protagonist.  Indeed, the two men waged so public and wordy a warfare<note place="foot">
<p>
See Spitta, i. 359 ff.
</p>
</note> that Bach's social relations with the one and official connection with the other must have been rendered difficult.  To his settled convictions regarding the fellowship of music and worship Pietism offered Puritan opposition.  In fact, its lack of sympathy eventually drove him from M&uuml;hlhausen, in hope, in his own words, <q>to realise my views upon the right ordering of Church music without vexation from others.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Ibid.</foreign>, i. 374.  On the other hand, Baoh's art was visibly affected by Pietistic influences, as Schweitzer, i. 169, shows.
</p>
</note> Eilmar, on the other hand, though he admitted the aesthetic value of music, conspicuously lacked the warmth and emotionalism of Bach's religious temperament.  To him undoubtedly we must attribute the cold austerity of the three M&uuml;hlhausen libretti and the suppression of the personal note already sounded in Bach's Arnstadt Cantata.  Nor did Eilmar's influence pass with Bach's departure from M&uuml;hlhausen.<note place="foot">
<p>
Eilmar died in 1715 (Spitta, i. 361).
</p>
</note> It is to be traced in the early libretti of the Weimar period.
</p>
<p>
The Weimar Cantatas are twenty-two in number, of which all but three were written subsequently to Bach's appointment as Concertmeister early in 1714. He had been organist to the Ducal Court of Weimar since June 1708, a position which did not require him to compose for the Ducal Chapel. On the other hand, three Cantatas are attributed to the early Weimar years. But they
<pb n="168" />
cannot be positively dated, and their libretti bear such clear traces of Eilmar's influence that their composition may belong rather to the M&uuml;hlhausen period.  Their texts display Eilmar's preference for strictly Biblical material and a disinclination to employ secular forms.  The first of them<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 189: <title>Meine Seele r&uuml;hmt und preist.</title>
</p>
</note> is a paraphrase of the Magnificat. The second<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 150: <title>Nach dir, Herr, verlanget mich.</title>
</p>
</note> consists of four verses of Psalm 25, along with three simple rhymed stanzas which we have no difficulty in attributing to Bach himself.  The third, <title>Gottes Zeit ist die allerbeste Zeit</title> (No. 106), was composed, Spitta conjectures,<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. i. 456.
</p>
</note> for the funeral of Philipp Grossgebauer, Rector of Weimar School, in 1711.  But more recently, and more probably, Pirro<note place="foot">
<p>
<title>J.S. Bach,</title> p. 87.
</p>
</note> has expressed the opinion that Bach wrote it for the funeral of his uncle, Tobias Lammerhirt, who was buried at Erfurt in September 1707.  The theory accords with the suggestion that all three Cantatas belong to the M&uuml;hlhausen period.  If so, it is probable that the libretto, a very ingenious mosaic of Scripture texts, was written by Eilmar for the occasion.  It is the last in which we detect his influence.
</p>
<p>
Bach's appointment as Ducal Concertmeister at Weimar can be placed between 14th January and 19th March 1714<note place="foot">
<p>
The conclusion is based on letters printed by Spitta, i. 517.
</p>
</note>
and, it is probable, was nearer the former date.  He seems to have produced the first Cantata his new post required him to write on Sexagesima Sunday, which fell on 4th February in that year.  From thence to the end of 1716 he produced nineteen Cantatas and collaborated with a writer whose libretti at length gave him a satisfactory literary medium.
</p>
<p>
The new poet, Erdmann Neumeister, four of whose libretti Bach set to music immediately after his 
<pb n="169" />
appointment, and a fifth a year later,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 18, 61, 142, 160, and 69.  See Table.
</p>
</note> was considerably Bach's senior.<note place="foot">
<p>
He was born May 12, 1671 (Spitta, i. 470).
</p>
</note> As far back as 1700 he had begun to write a cycle of Cantata texts for the Ducal Chapel at Weissenfels, and pubushed it in 1704, with an explanatory Preface referred to later.<note place="foot">
<p>
The volume is entitled <title>Erdmann Neumeisters Geistliche Cantaten statt einer Kirchen-Musik.  Die zweyte Auflage.</title>
</p>
</note> In 1708 he issued a second cycle for the Court of Rudolstadt, while in 1711 and 1714 third and fourth cycles were written for the Ducal Chapel at Eisenach.  All four cycles were reissued in 1716,<note place="foot">
<p>
Entitled <title>Herrn Erdmann Neumeisters F&uuml;nffache Kirchen-Andachten,</title> Leipzig, 1716.
</p>
</note> with the addition of a fifth and a Preface, which lauded Neumeister as <q>the first German to give sacred music its fitting position by introducing and perfecting the Church Cantata.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta, i. 474. 
</p>
</note>
</p>

<p>
Spitta has dealt exhaustively<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. i. 466 ff.
</p>
</note> with the evolution and construction of the Neumeister libretto.  It need only be remarked that it adapted a secular or operatic apparatus to the service of religion, and that the innovation, hateful to many, triumphed because of Neumeister's delicate handling of it.  He perfected the new form, however, in stages.  <q>A Cantata,</q> he insisted in his 1704 Preface, <q>is simply a fragment of Opera made up of Aria and Recitativo.</q>  But the restriction excluded from the Cantata its most appropriate material.  In his 1708 cycle he found a place for the chorus.  Finally, he admitted the Bible stanza and congregational hymn.  With their inclusion the Cantata libretto assumed the form familiar to us in Bach's use.  It represents a combination of secular Opera and ecclesiastical Motet.  The free Arias and Recitativi are derived from the one, the Bible stanzas and congregational hymns perpetuate the traditions of the other. Unity of design is stamped on
<pb n="170" />
the whole by its general subordination to the Gospel for the Day.  Thus, at the moment when Bach was about to devote his genius to the Cantata, Neumeister opportunely provided him with a libretto singularly adapted to the end Bach had in view, and appropriate to the musical expression by which he proposed to secure it.  He adhered to it almost to the end of his life, and found unfailing inspiration in Neumeister's sincerity, delicacy, and uniformly religious outlook.  Neumeister's Arias, with a single exception,<note place="foot">
<p>
See the Aria (Duetto) of Cantata No. 28.
</p>
</note> are hymn-like in mood and metre.  His Recitativi are reflective and prayerful, rarely oratorical or pictorial, simple communings upon the Gospel themes which the libretto handles.<note place="foot">
<p>
See particularly the Litanei in Cantata No. 18.
</p>
</note>
</p>

<p>
Bach's early introduction to Neumeister's texts is explained by the close relations between the Courts of Weimar and Eisenach, by his associations with his own birthplace, and his intimacy with Georg Philipp Telemann, Kapellmeister there, for whose use Neumeister's third and fourth cycles were written.<note place="foot">
<p>
Telemann was Carl Philipp Emmanuel Bach's godfather (Spitta, i. 486).
</p>
</note> Bach set, in all, seven of the libretti&mdash;four from the fourth cycle,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 24, 28, 69, 61. 
</p>
</note> one from the third,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 18.
</p>
</note> and two from the first,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 142, 160.
</p>
</note> one of which (No. 142) differs so much from the published version as to raise the question whether Bach did not receive it direct from Neumeister in the form in which he set it.<note place="foot">
<p>
See Spitta, i. 630.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
That Bach should have set no more than seven of Neumeister's texts<note place="foot">
<p>
His influence is also detected in Nos. 27, 56, 199.
</p>
</note> is strange.  He shrank, perhaps, from appropriating libretti on which his friend Telemann had a prior claim.<note place="foot">
<p>
Telemann also set the libretti of Bach's Nos. 18 and 142. See Spitta, i. 487.
</p>
</note> But the reason is found rather in the fact that at Weimar Bach discovered in 1715 a local
<pb n="171" />
poet of first-rate ability who, with perhaps but one exception, wrote the libretti of all the Cantatas he composed during the last two years of his Weimar appointment.
</p>
<p>
Salomo Franck, Bach's new collaborator, was Curator of the Ducal Museum of Coins and Medals at Weimar.  He was twenty-six years older than Bach.  But Spitta's conjecture,<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. i. 530.
</p>
</note> that the two men were not acquainted, is hardly tenable.  Both resided in the same small provincial town, both were in the Duke's service, and throughout 1715 and 1716 collaborated in at least ten Cantatas performed in the Ducal Chapel.  Moreover, though the Preface of Franck's first cycle is dated 4th June 1715,<note place="foot">
<p>
Wustmann, <title>Joh. Seb. Bach's Kantaten-Texte</title> (1913), p. xxii n. 
The cycle is entitled <title>Evangelisches Andachts-Opffer.</title> 
</p>
</note> Bach had already set one of its libretti for Easter of that year. A second cycle of texts, of which Bach made little use,<note place="foot">
<p>
Only Nos. 70, 147, and 186 are taken from it. 
</p>
</note> was published by Franck in 1717.<note place="foot">
<p>
Entitled <title>Evangelische Sonn- und Fest-Tages Andachten.</title> 
</p>
</note>
</p>

<p>
Schweitzer, no doubt, is correct in his conclusion<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 131.
</p>
</note> that Bach was drawn to Franck by his poetic insight, his mysticism, and innate feeling for nature.  It must be remembered, too, that his libretti were, in some degree, official.  On the other hand, Franck was Neumeister's inferior in ability to conceive a picture fit to express Bach's larger moods, and on occasion could descend to sheer bathos.<note place="foot">
<p>
For instance, the Aria in Cantata No. 168, beginning:
</p>
<q rend="display">
Kapital und Interessen 
Meiner Schulden gross und klein, 
Mussen einst verrechnet sein.
</q>
</note> But his texts have a rhythmic swing and melody which Bach found agreeable.  He set at least sixteen of them, and returned to them even after he settled at Leipzig.
</p>
<p>
The circumstances which terminated Bach's service at Weimar are familiar, and need not be restated.  He received a new appointment at C&ouml;then on 1st August 1717, and took up his duties there, probably at Christmas, that year.<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta, ii. 5; Schweitzer, i. 106.
</p>
</note> His position was that of Capellmeister to the princely Court.  He never styles himself Court Organist,<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta, ii. 3.
</p>
</note> and his duties severed him for five years from the service of the Church, to which he had declared his particular dedication in 1708.  The C&ouml;then Court was unpretentious.  The Prince was a Calvinist.  Figurate music was not permitted in the Court Chapel, and its Organ was small and inadequate.  Hence Bach devoted himself chiefly to chamber music, and only two genuine Church Cantatas belong to this period of his career.  Both must have been written for performance elsewhere, possibly in connection with Bach's frequent Autumn tours as a performer.<note place="foot">
<p>
The two Cantatas are Nos. 47 and 141.
</p>
</note>
</p>

<p>
For both Cantatas Bach employed a librettist, otherwise little known, named Johann Friedrich Helbig, State Secretory to the Eisenach Court. In March 1720,<note place="foot">
<p>
Wustmann, p. xxiii.
</p>
</note> more than two years after Bach's arrival at C&ouml;then, Helbig published a cycle of <q>Musical Texts on the Sunday and Saints' Day Gospels throughout the year,</q> for performance <q>in God's honour by the Prince's Kapelle at Eisenach.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta, ii. 12 n.
</p>
</note>
How they came into Bach's hands we do not know, but can readily conjecture.  They are indifferent poetry, judging them by the two specimens Bach made use of, and are uniform in construction.  The first movement invariably is a Chorus upon a text from the Gospel for the Day, or a Scripture passage closely related to it.  Two Arias separated by a Recitative follow. A Choral brings the libretto to an end.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Choral is absent from No. 141.  It should be <q>Christe, du Lamm Gotten.</q>
</p>
</note>
</p>

<p>
The first of the two Cantatas written to Helbig's words
<pb n="173" />
was designed for the Seventeenth Sunday after Trinity, which fell in 1720 on September 22.<note place="foot">
<p>
Schweitzer, ii. 147.  The Cantata is No. 47, <title>Wer sich selbst erh&ouml;het.</title>
</p>
</note> Spitta conjectures<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 13.
</p>
</note> that Bach intended it for performance at Hamburg.  In fact, his wife's death postponed Bach's visit to that town until November, by which date the Sunday appropriate to the Cantata had passed. Spitta holds that the Cantata may have been performed, after all, during the visit. Schweitzer is sceptical.<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 147. 
</p>
</note> But Bach certainly expended great pains upon the score.
</p>

<p>
The second Helbig Cantata<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 141: <title>Das ist je gewisslich wahr.</title>
</p>
</note> is for the Third Sunday in Advent, and the date of it would appear to have been 1721.  It is one of the least agreeable of Bach's works.  Spitta <note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 15.
</p>
</note> declares it a juvenile composition hastily adapted to a new libretto. Schweitzer<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 148.
</p>
</note> expresses the same opinion, and Sir Hubert Parry<note place="foot">
<p>
<title>Johann Sebastian Bach,</title> p. 108.
</p>
</note> finds the work <q>rather commonplace.</q>  Its genuineness is discussed by Max Schreyer in the <q>Bach-Jahrbuch</q> for 1912, and more recently Rudolf Wustmann has insisted that it does not bear the stamp of Bach's genius.<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Op. cit.</foreign>, Note 195.
</p>
</note> If it actually was composed in 1721, its production must have coincided with Bach's second marriage on December 3 of that year.<note place="foot">
<p>
Spitta, ii. 147.
</p>
</note> In that case, his resort to old material is explicable.
</p>
<p>
Only these two Cantatas were composed at C&ouml;then.  But later, at Leipzig, two others were manufactured out of secular material written there.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 134 and 173.
</p>
</note> It is unnecessary to refer to them, except to remark that in each case Bach appears to have been the author of the new libretto.  In the first of them<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 134: <title>Ein Herz, das seinen Jesum lebend weiss.</title>
</p>
</note> it is clear that he was handicapped by the frankly secular metre of the original stanzas.  The 
<pb n="174" />
second of them,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 173: <title>Erh&ouml;tes Fleisch und Blut.</title>
</p>
</note> originally a Birthday Ode to Prince Leopold of Anhalt-C&ouml;then, is a masterly conversion into a Whit-Monday text which, assuming that Bach wrote it, puts his literary facility beyond question.
</p>
<p>
Bach made the last move in his professional career on May 31, 1723, when he was inducted Cantor of St. Thomas' School at Leipzig, with particular charge of the Churches of St. Thomas and St. Nicolas.  Here by far the greater number of his Cantatas appeared, and 172 of them survive.  They are too numerous to be considered individually, and their classification is rendered difficult by the fact that the authorship of most of their libretti is conjectural and not ascertained.  They fall, however, into two large categories, each of which exhibits characteristics of its own.
</p>
<p>
The dividing year, clearly but not arbitrarily, is 1734.  Before it and after it Bach was aided by new writers.  But the earlier period pre-eminently was one of experiment, out of which emerged the glorified hymn-libretto, or Choral Cantata, of Bach's last years.  That it sprang, in some degree, from the difficulty of finding good original texts in sufficient number may be granted.  That it was adopted as an avenue of escape from Picander's coarser work is a conjecture based, apparently, upon a prevalent exaggeration of Bach's dependence on that writer.  The fundamental reason which led Bach to the hymn-libretto undoubtedly was the fact that it most closely fulfilled the ideals which informed his work.
</p>
<p>
The first Cantata performed during Bach's Cantorship<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 75: <title>Die Elenden sollen essen,</title> sung on May 30, the day preceding Bach's formal induction.
</p>
</note> reveals a new author, whose assistance, if the conclusion is well grounded, was at Bach's disposal throughout the whole of the earlier Leipzig period.  Spitta's keen insight failed him in this instance.  He betrays no recognition of 
<pb n="175" />
the new writer, and occasionally<note place="foot">
<p>
For instance, Nos. 67 and 102.
</p>
</note> attributes his libretti to Picander.  The credit of the discovery belongs to Rudolf Wustmann, though he fails to work it out to its fullest conclusions.<note place="foot">
<p>
Wustmann, by implication, only associates eight libretti (Cantatas Nos. 37, 44, 75, 76, 86, 104, 166, 179) with Weiss.  All of them belong to the early years, 1723-27. 
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
No one can read the early Leipzig libretti without being struck by the number of them that are not only uniform in structure, but similar in tone and point.  They all begin with a Bible text, chosen frequently, but not invariably, from the Gospel for the Day.  Every one of them ends with a hymn-stanza.  Their Arias, with hardly an exception,<note place="foot">
<p>
See Nos. 75 and 105.
</p>
</note> are written in what, compared with Picander's rollicking dactyls, may be held hymn-metres.  Their Recitativi, almost invariably, are didactic or exegetical.<note place="foot">
<p>
See Nos. 25, 42, 77.  As an extreme illustration, the first Recitative of No. 25 begins with the words, <title>Die ganze Welt ist nur ein Hospital.</title>
</p>
</note> They do not display the vapid rhetoric of Picander.  Nor do they express the reflective or prayerful mood that reveals Bach.  They are essentially expositive and, it is noticeable, are studded with direct or veiled references to Bible passages which expand or enforce the lesson of the initial text.  In a word, they suggest the work of a preacher casting his sermon notes into lyrical form, an impression which is strengthened by the fact that the libretto invariably opens with a Scripture passage and frequently blends the Gospel and Epistle for the Day in one harmonious teaching.  Spitta detected this characteristic.  But he failed to follow up the clue.  He speaks<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 388.
</p>
</note> of one of these texts<note place="foot">
<p>
Cantata No. 65: <title>Sie werden aus Saba Alle kommen.</title>
</p>
</note> as a <q>moralising homily,</q> a phrase concisely appropriate to them all.  Moreover, a remark of his,<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. i. 361.
</p>
</note> pointing the significance
<pb n="176" />
of the god-parents chosen by Bach for his children&mdash;Eilmar, for instance&mdash;as revealing Bach's intimate associates at the moment, affords another clue to the personality of the new writer.
</p>
<p>
Among the clergy of St. Thomas' during Bach's Cantorate were two men, father and son, each of whom bore the name Christian Weiss.  The elder was Pastor of the Church from 1714 till his death in 1737.  He was a cultured man, in touch with the University, and possibly formed a link between it and Bach, to whom he showed greater cordiality than the Cantor received from other clerical colleagues.  In 1732 his daughter, Dorothea Sophia stood godmother to Bach's son, Johann Christoph Friedrich, afterwards famous as the <q>B&uuml;ckeburg Bach.</q><note place="foot">
<p>
Wustmann, p. xxiv.
</p>
</note> In 1737 his son stood sponsor to Bach's daughter, Johanna Caroline.<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="la">Ibid.</foreign>
</p>
</note> Nor can it be altogether without significance that the names Dorothea, Sophia, Christian, are borne by others of Bach's children by his second marriage.  There is sufficient evidence, therefore, that Bach's relations with the elder Weiss were intimate enough to support a literary partnership.  Moreover, circumstances lend weight to the inference.  For some years before Bach's arrival in Leipzig, Weiss suffered from an affection of the throat which kept him from the pulpit.  But, during the first year of Bach's Cantorate, he was able to resume his preaching.  If he was, in fact, the author of the libretti, we can have little difficulty in concluding that they and his sermons were built on the same text.
</p>
<p>
So far as they can be identified&mdash;the attempt is somewhat speculative&mdash;Weiss provided Bach with at least thirty-three libretti.  He set five of them in 1723, three in 1724, nine in or about 1725, one in 1727, two in 1730, six in 1731, three in 1732, and four in the later Leipzig period.<note place="foot">
<p>
See the Table.
</p>
</note> Fourteen others bear a constructional
<pb n="177" />
resemblance to Weiss's texts,<note place="foot">
<p>
They ore Nos. 6, 17, 22, 43, 48, 57, 144, 148, 157, 159,171, 190,195, and the incomplete Cantata, <title>Ehre sei Gott in der H&ouml;he.</title>
</p>
</note> but their character refers them rather to Bach or Picander.  Even so, if we do not exaggerate his activity, Weiss seems to have written at least one-sixth of the Leipzig libretti and more than a quarter of those of the earlier period.  Without a doubt he eased a difficult situation in Bach's experience before his regular association with Picander began.
</p>
<p>
Apart from their revelation of Christian Weiss, the libretti of Bach's first year at Leipzig do not call for comment.  Franck and Neumeister appear among them, and we trace Bach's hand in nine.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 16, 23, 63, 81, 83, 153, 154, 184, 194.  See the Table.
</p>
</note> But at Easter, 1724, he broke new ground with a libretto whence developed the Cantata form of his latest period.
</p>
<p>
The Cantata for Easter Day 1724,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 4: <title>Christ lag in Todesbanden.</title>
</p>
</note> is Bach's earliest setting of an entire congregational hymn.  Spitta suggests<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 393. 
</p>
</note> that he felt the fitness of giving the libretto an antique character to match the hymn's melody.  However that may be, Bach would appear already to have been groping towards the Choral Cantata of the late '30's.  And though he did not repeat the experiment until the Easter of 1731,<note place="foot">
<p>
See the Table: No. 112, <title>Derr herr ist mein getreuer Hirt.</title>
</p>
</note> he treated three hymn-libretti in the interval in a manner which shows him already to have worked out the essentials of the Choral Cantata form.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 8, 20, 93. 
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
Another landmark meets us a year and a half after the Easter experiment.  On September 23, 1725(?)&mdash;the Seventeenth Sunday after Trinity&mdash;Bach produced a Cantata<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 148: <title>Bringet dem Herrn Ehre seines Namens.</title>
</p>
</note> whose Arias are set to words which had appeared in print in the preceding year.  Their author was a hack writer named Christian Friedrich Henrici, or, as he preferred to style himself, Picander.  His hand probably
<pb n="178" />
is also traced in the libretto used by Bach on the preceding Sunday<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 8: <title>Liebster Gott, wann werd' ich sterben.</title>
</p>
</note> and again in that for Sexagesima in the same year.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 181: <title>Leichtgesinnte Flattergeister.</title>
</p>
</note> But the evidence is only inferential.  That he collaborated with Bach on September 23, 1725 (?), is incontestable, and the work defines the beginning of a long and fruitful partnership.
</p>
<p>
Spitta,<note place="foot">
<p>
 Vol. ii. 340 ff.
</p>
</note> who tells us all that is known of Picander, has sufficiently exposed his superficial literary facility.  He commenced to write sacred poetry in 1724, and on Advent Sunday of that year began a cycle of <q>Profitable Thoughts,</q> so he termed them, upon the Sunday and Saints' Day Gospels.  He published them in 1725, when the cycle was complete.<note place="foot">
<p>
The volume is entitled <title>Sammlung Erbaulicher Gedancken, Bey und &uuml;ber gewohnlichen Sonn- und Festtags-Evangelien,</title> Leipzig.
</p>
</note> Three years later he issued a cycle of Cantata texts for 1728-29 in the Neumeister form.<note place="foot">
<p>
<title>Cantaten auf die Sonn- und Fest-Tage durch das gantze Jahr,</title> Leipzig, 1728.  He reprinted them in 1732 in his <title>Satyrische Gedichte.</title>
</p>
</note> That he intended them for Bach's use is apparent in the fact that he expressly dedicated them to the service of <q>our incomparable Capellmeister.</q>  But Bach made the sparest use of them and of the earlier <q>Profitable Thoughts</q> alike.  From the latter he took not one libretto.<note place="foot">
<p>
But see Cantata No. 148 and Spitta, ii. 693.  Also No. 19.
</p>
</note> Of the 1728-29 cycle he used only eight texts.<note place="foot">
<p>
Cantatas Nos. 145, 156, 159, 171, 174, 188, 190 (one version), and the Cantata <title>Ehre sei Gott.</title>
</p>
</note> One more libretto can be referred to Picander's later publications,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 157.
</p>
</note> and of six others we can be sure that they are based upon his texts.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 19, 30, 36, 84, 148, 197. 
</p>
</note> In other words, of the original libretti of the Leipzig period we can trace Picander's hand positively in no more than fifteen.
</p>
<p>
It is necessary to emphasise this point. For Spitta<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 346.
</p>
</note> has stated positively that Picander wrote <q>most</q> of the Leipzig libretti, and his opinion has been generally
<pb n="179" />
accepted.  But its correctness may be contested.  It is suspicious, to begin with, that Picander never published the texts which Spitta asserts him to have poured out in such profusion. <q>He placed no value,</q> Spitta answers readily, <q>on these manufactured compositions, put together hastily to please his friend.</q>  But the argument cannot stand.  Why should Picander have thought less of libretti actually used by his <q>incomparable Capellmeister</q> than of those published for and rejected by him?&mdash;for Spitta does not venture to declare that as literature the rejected were superior to the accepted texts.  If out of a published cycle of libretti expressly written for him Bach chose only eight texts, are Picander's <q>manufactured compositions,</q> as Spitta calls them, likely to have attracted him to a greater degree?  We can detect his hand perhaps in six Cantatas<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 32, 48, 67, 90, 144, 181.
</p>
</note> besides those already mentioned, and Bach relied on him exclusively for his secular texts.  One concludes, none the less, that Bach rarely accepted an original Cantata libretto from Picander, and employed him chiefly on the Choral Cantatas of his latest period.  Excluding them, and adding the probable to the actual original Picander texts, they total only twenty-one, a fraction inadequate to support Spitta's sweeping statement.
</p>
<p>
From the advent of Picander in 1725, to the end of the first Leipzig period nine years later, Bach does not seem to have gone outside the circle of familial authors for his regular Cantata texts.  On October 17, 1727, however, he produced a funeral Cantata, or <q>Trauer-Musik,</q> in memory of the late Queen of Poland, the libretto of which was written by Professor J. C. Gottsched.  The partnership, in fact, was accidental: the libretto was supplied to Bach with the commission to set it to music, and, so far as is known, Gottsched and he did not collaborate again.
</p>
<pb n="180" />
<p>
So, reviewing Bach's activities during his first eleven years at Leipzig, we find that of the hundred libretti set by him to music Christian Weiss heads the list as the presumed author of twenty-nine.  Bach follows him with eighteen.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 16, 22, 23, 27, 35, 51, 56, 58, 63, 66, 81, 82, 83, 153, 154, 194, 195. No. 184 is an adaptation. See also Nos. 19, 36, 84, 144, 145, 148, for Bach's collaboration with Picander.
</p>
</note> Picander's hand appears in fifteen, Franck's in eight,<note place="foot">
<p>
Besides No. 80, a Choral Cantata.
</p>
</note> Neumeister's and Gottsched's in one each.  Fifteen libretti are congregational hymns in their original or paraphrased form.  One is the <title>Gloria in Excelsis</title> of the B minor Mass adapted as a Christmas Cantata (No. 190).  Twelve are by authors not identified.
</p>
<p>
Passing to the later Leipzig period, seventy-two surviving Cantatas are attributed to the years 1735-50.  They reveal one, perhaps two, new writers.  The first of them, Marianne von Ziegler, was identified by Spitta in 1892.  She was the widow of an officer, resident in Leipzig, a cultured woman, in touch with University life, her house a salon for music and musicians.<note place="foot">
<p>
Schweitzer, ii. 332 ff.
</p>
</note> There is no reason to suppose Bach to have been of her circle, or that he was acquainted with her literary gifts.  Indeed the contrary is to be inferred from the fact that, though she published her poems in 1728,<note place="foot">
<p>
Entitled <title>Versuch in gebundener Schreibart.</title>
</p>
</note> he does not seem to have known them until seven years later, when he used them for nine consecutive Sundays and Festivals in 1735, beginning on the Third Sunday after Easter, and ending on Trinity Sunday.
</p>
<p>
In addition to these nine libretti, both Spitta<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. iii. 71.
</p>
</note>and Schweitzer<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 331 n.
</p>
</note> attribute to her the text of Bach's Cantata for the Second Sunday after Easter in the same year.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 85: <title>Ich bin ein guter Hirt.</title>
</p>
</note> It is uniform in construction with the authentic nine, but is not among the authoress's published works. Wustmann<note place="foot">
<p>
Note 60.
</p>
</note>
<pb n="181" />
finds the tone of the libretto less ardent and its rhythm rougher than those published under her name.  Admitting the soundness of Wustmann's criticism, one hazards the opinion that the challenged text was written at the period when Bach set it, namely, in 1735, eight years after the poetess published her earlier texts.  The difference of time may account for the difference of texture to which Wustmann draws attention, but leaves undecided the question whether Bach was drawn to the earlier through the later and unpublished texts or vice versa.  It is quite probable that he set other libretti by the same writer, though Schweitzer's<note place="foot">
<p>
Vol. ii. 331 n.
</p>
</note> attribution to her of a second text for Ascension Day, 1735, must be rejected.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 33: <title>Gott f&auml;ret auf mit Jauchzen.</title>
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
It is worth noticing, since it certainly reveals Bach's preference, that Marianne von Ziegler's libretti are constructed almost invariably in the Weiss form.  Every one of them but three<note place="foot">
<p>
See Table.
</p>
</note> opens with a Bible passage, invariably taken from St. John's Gospel, which provides the Gospel for the Day from the First Sunday after Easter down to Trinity Sunday, excepting Ascension Day.  All but one (No. 68) of the libretti conclude with a Choral, and their Arias are hymn-like in metre.  The tone of them, however, is warmer, more personal, less didactic than the Weiss texts.  That Bach regarded them with particular favour is apparent in the circumstance that he took the trouble to revise all but one of them.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 74.
</p>
</note> That they stirred his genius deeply is visible in the settings he gave them.
</p>
<p>
After 1735 the chronology of the Cantatas is not certainly ascertained.  Of those that fall after the Ziegler year, as we may term it, the majority can only be dated approximately as circa 1740, that is, anywhere between 1735 and 1744.  Nor, except rarely, can we detect in their libretti the work of those on whom Bach elsewhere
<pb n="182" /> relied.  Weiss, who died late in 1737, is only an occasional contributor.  The texts of this period, in fact, are the outcome of Bach's own experiments in libretto form.  Thirty-three of them are Choral Cantatas, whose evolution it remains to trace concisely.
</p>
<p>
That Bach should have turned to Lutheran hymnody, chiefly of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and that the Cantatas built upon it should be his most perfect religious work is not surprising.  The hymns and their melodies were the foundations upon which the temple of German Protestantism had been reared.  They appealed vividly and powerfully to Bach's spiritual nature, and profoundly influenced his musical utterance.  His whole career, as Sir Hubert Parry points out,<note place="foot">
<p>
<foreign lang="de">Op. cit., </foreign>p. 377.
</p>
</note> was an effort to widen his means for self-expression.  And the Choral Cantata, in effect, was the reconciliation or blending of this self-discipline.  It was the supreme achievement of Bach's genius to assert the faith and idealism of Lutheran hymnody with the fullest resources of his technique.
</p>
<p>
It is not our task to consider the hymn libretto in its relation to the structure of Bach's latest Cantatas.  Necessarily it tied him to a stereotyped design, which he clung to with greater persistency because it exactly fulfilled his devotional purpose.  But experience compelled him, after a brief trial, to discard the simple hymn libretto.  In the earlier Leipzig years as many as eight Choral Cantatas<note place="foot">
<p>
See Table.
</p>
</note> are set to the unaltered text of a congregational hymn.  In the later Leipzig period only two<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 100 and 107, both of them c. 1735.
</p>
</note> libretti are of that character.  Bach, in fact, soon realised that, while the unaltered hymn-stanza, with its uniform metre and balanced rhyme, was appropriate to the simple Choral or elaborate Fantasia, it was unmalleable for use as an Aria or Recitative.  Hence, retaining the unaltered Hymn-stanza for the musical movements
<pb n="183" />
congruous to it, he was led to paraphrase, in free madrigal form, those stanzas which he selected for the Arias and Recitativi.
</p>
<p>
As early as September 16, 1725,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 8, for the Sixteenth Sunday after Trinity.
</p>
</note> Bach was moving towards this solution.  And it is significant that Picander's hand is visible in the libretto.  The next example<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 93, for the Fifth Sunday after Trinity (1728).
</p>
</note> occurs three years later, and again reveals Picander's authorship.  Two other instances also occur in the early Leipzig period.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 9 (? 1731), 99 (c. 1733).
</p>
</note> To that point, however, it is clear that Bach was not satisfied as to the most effective treatment of the hymn-libretto.  But in the second Leipzig period, after his collaboration with Marianne von Ziegler, he arrived at and remained constant to a uniform design.  Of the thirty-nine Choral Cantatas of the whole period only two exhibit the earlier form.  Of all the others the libretto consists partly of unaltered hymn-stanzas&mdash;invariably used for the first and last movements, and occasionally elsewhere&mdash;but chiefly of paraphrased stanzas of the hymn, whose accustomed melody, wherever else it may be introduced, is associated invariably with the hymn when the text is used in its unaltered form.  We, to whom both words and melody are too frequently unfamiliar, may view the perfections of the Choral Cantata with some detachment.  But Bach's audience listened to hymns and tunes which were in the heart of every hearer and a common possession of them all.  The appeal of his message was the more arresting because it spoke as directly to himself as to those he addressed.
</p>
<p>
It would be satisfactory and interesting to point positively to Bach's own handiwork in these libretti, of which he set fifty-four in the period 1724-44.  Unfortunately it is impossible to do so, except, perhaps, in a single case,<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 122.
</p>
</note>
<pb n="184" />
where we can reasonably infer that the libretto is his.  Of the rest, one is by Franck.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 80.
</p>
</note> In eighteen of them the hand of Picander is more or less patent.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 1, 2, 5, 8, 20, 26, 62, 78, 91, 92, 93, 96, 115, 121, 124, 127, 138, 140.
</p>
</note> Nineteen<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 7, 9, 10, 14, 33, 41, 94, 99, 101, 111, 113, 114, 116, 125, 126, 130, 139, 178, 180.
</p>
</note> we can only venture to mark <q>anonymous,</q> though Picander is probably present in most of them.  Ten are unaltered congregational hymns.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 4, 97, 100, 107, 112, 117, 129, 137, 177, 192.
</p>
</note> There remain, however, five<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 3, 38, 123, 133, 135.
</p>
</note> in which, perhaps, we detect another, and the last, of Bach's literary helpers.
</p>
<p>
Wustmann draws attention<note place="foot">
<p>
P. xxiv.
</p>
</note> to the libretto of Cantata No. 38, a paraphrase of Luther's Psalm 130.  He finds in it, and reasonably, an expression of <q>Jesus religion</q> very alien to Picander's muse, and suggests the younger Christian Weiss as the author of it.  Like his father, he was Bach's colleague, the godfather of his daughter, and undoubtedly on terms of close friendship with him.  But if he wrote the libretto of Cantata No. 38, probably it is not the only one.  The same note rings in four more of the Choral Cantatas,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 3, 123, 133, 135.
</p>
</note> which may be attributed tentatively to Weiss, though their ascription to Bach would be equally congruous.
</p>
<p>
Returning, however, to the seventy-two libretti of the later Leipzig period we reach this result: More than half of them (thirty-nine) are congregational hymns, all but two of which are of the paraphrased type in which we detect the work of Picander, Bach himself, and perhaps the younger Weiss.  Of the remaining thirty-three original libretti Marianne von Ziegler heads the list with nine, and perhaps ten.<note place="foot">
<p>
See 
<foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>, p. 180.
</p>
</note>  Bach follows with a problematical
<pb n="185" />
six,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 17, 34, 43, 151, 197, and <title>Herr Gott, Beherrsoher aller Dinge.</title>
</p>
</note> Picander with five,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 30, 32, 48, 57, 90.
</p>
</note> the elder Weiss with four,<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 45, 79, 110, 143.
</p>
</note> Neumeister with one.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 28. 
</p>
</note> One text is taken from the Bible.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 50.
</p>
</note> Another consists of a single stanza of a hymn by Martin Behm.<note place="foot">
<p>
No. 118.
</p>
</note> Five are by authors unknown or undetected.<note place="foot">
<p>
Nos. 6, 11, 13, 146, 193.
</p>
</note>
</p>
<p>
But, as was said at the outset, the attribution of particular libretti to individual writers is conjectural, except in comparatively few cases.  Yet, unsatisfying as it is, this guess-work reveals with approximate correctness the extent to which Bach drew upon his own and other people's abilities for the texts he needed.  Summarising our conclusions, we discover that about one-quarter (fifty-four) of the 202 libretti set by Bach between the years 1704 and 1744 were provided by the hymn-book.  It is shown elsewhere<note place="foot">
<p>
See <title>Bach's Chorals,</title> Part II., Introduction.
</p>
</note> that all but eleven of them are taken from Paul Wagner's volumes.  The elder Weiss comes next with thirty-three libretti.  Bach follows with thirty, Salomo Franck with twenty-one, Picander with twenty (exclusive of his arrangements of Choral Cantata texts).  Marianne von Ziegler contributes ten, Neumeister seven, Eilmar and Helbig two each, Gottsched and Martin Behm one each.  Three libretti are taken from the Bible or Church liturgy.  Eighteen remain anonymous.
</p>
<p>
The literary qualities of the libretti are not under discussion here.  They have a characteristic, however, on which one cannot forbear from remarking.  Indifferent literature as, for the most part, they are&mdash;children of their period and blemished with its imperfections&mdash;they enshrine an extraordinarily interesting anthology of the religious poetry of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries.  They expose the evangelical thought of Germany from the age of Luther to that of Bach,
<pb n="186" />
and are particularly rich in the lyrical fervour of the Reformation itself.  Of the seventy-seven hymn-writers whom Bach includes in his collection, so many as forty-four belong to the sixteenth century.  Only thirteen of them touch Bach's own period.  And a similar bias to the Reformation epoch is observable in his choice of the tunes of the Chorals, which are absent from only twenty-one of the Cantatas.  By far the greater number of them are coeval with the hymns themselves; that is, they date from the Reformation and behind it.
</p>
<p>
Here clearly is the source of Bach's inspiration, the master-key of his art.  He touches Luther, is in a sense his complement, his art builded on the foundations Luther laid, consecrated to the ends Luther vindicated, inspired by a dedication of himself to God's service not less exalted&mdash;a great artist, a great Protestant, a great man.<note place="foot">
<p>
The above article and the Table that follows were communicated originally to the Musical Association on March 28, 1918.
</p>
</note>
</p>

<p>
NOTE.&mdash;Cantatas distinguished by an asterisk (*) are for Soli voices only (S.A.T.B. unless the particular voices are stated); those marked (&dagger;) include, in addtion, simple four-part Chorals: the rest contain concerted Choruses.
</p>

<div>
<pb n="187" />
<head type="sub">(1) COMPOSED AT ARNSTADT (see also Nos. 150, 189.)</head>
<table cols="5" rend="rules:all;
      latexcolumns: '|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|';
      tblcolumns: 'l|l|l|l|l(30m)'">

<row><cell>
No.
</cell><cell>
Date.
</cell><cell>
Title.
</cell><cell>
Author of Libretto.
</cell><cell>
Composition of the Text.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
15
</cell><cell>
1704. Easter Day (revised for subsequent performance).
</cell><cell>
Den du wirst meine Seele nicht in der H&uuml;lle lassen (Psalm xvi. 10).
</cell><cell>
?Bach
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.</emph> Psalm xvi. 10; St. Mark xvi. 6; <emph>Part II.</emph> seven (six) stanzas of the anonymous hymn, <q>Auf freue dich, Seele, du bist nun getr&ouml;st</q>; Stanza iv. of Nikolaus Hermann's hymn <q>Wenn mein St&uuml;ndlein vorhanden ist.</q> The rest of the libretto perhaps is by Bach.
</cell></row>
</table>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">(2) COMPOSED AT M&Uuml;LHAUSEN (see also Nos. 150, 189.)</head>

<table cols="5" rend="rules:all;
      latexcolumns: '|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|';
      tblcolumns: 'l|l|l|l|l(30m)'">
	  
<row><cell>
No.
</cell><cell>
Date.
</cell><cell>
Title.
</cell><cell>
Author of Libretto.
</cell><cell>
Composition of the Text.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
131
</cell><cell>
1707. ? for llth, 19th, 21st, or 22nd S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Aus der Tiefe rufe ich, Herr,   zu   dir   (Psalm cxxx.)
</cell><cell>
Georg Christian Eilmar.
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxxx.; Stanzas ii. and v. of Bartholom&auml;us Ringwaldt's hymn, <q>Herr Jesu Christ, du h&ouml;chstes Gut.</q> T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
71
</cell><cell>
1708. Feb. 4. Town Council Inauguration.
</cell><cell>
Gott ist mein Konig (Psalm lxxiv. 12).
</cell><cell>
Bach (or Eilmar).
</cell><cell>
Psalm lxxiv. 12, 16, 17, 19;  2 Sam. xix. 35, 37; Deuteronomy xxxiii. 25; Gen. xxi. 22;   Stanza vi.  of Johann  Heermann's hymn, <q>O Gott, du frommer Gott</q>;  rest of libretto original.    A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="188" />

<row><cell>
196
</cell><cell>
1708. June 5. Wedding of Johann Lorenz Stauber (at Dornheim).
</cell><cell>
Der Herr denket an uns (Psalm cxv. 12).
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxv. 12-15.
</cell><cell>
The libretto consists exclusively of the Psalm verses. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>
</table>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">(3) COMPOSED AT WEIMAR. (See also Nos. 12, 72, 80, 164, 168, 186.)</head>




<table cols="5" rend="rules:all;
      latexcolumns: '|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|';
      tblcolumns: 'l|l|l|l|l(30m)'">
	  
<row><cell>
No.
</cell><cell>
Date.
</cell><cell>
Title.
</cell><cell>
Author of Libretto.
</cell><cell>
Composition of the Text.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*189
</cell><cell>
c. 1707-10. Visitation of the B.V.M.
</cell><cell>
Meine Seele r&uuml;hmt und preist.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown. ?Composed at Muhlhausen.
</cell><cell>
A paraphrase of the <q>Magnificat.</q>    Tenor Solo.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
150
</cell><cell>
c. 1710. ?Occasion.
</cell><cell>
Nach dir, Herr, verlanget mich (Psalm xxv. 1).
</cell><cell>
?Bach. ?Composed at M&uuml;hlhausen.
</cell><cell>
Psalm xxv. 1, 2, 5, 15; rest of libretto perhaps by Bach. See <title>Bach-Jahrbuch</title> for 1913, p. 39, on authenticity of Cantata.
</cell></row>



<row><cell>
106
</cell><cell>
?1711. Funeral of Rector Philipp Grossgebauer (Weimar); or ?1707 (Sept.) funeral of Thomas Lammerhirt (Erfurt).
</cell><cell>
Gottes Zeit ist die aller-beste Zeit <foreign lang="la">(Actus tragicus).</foreign>
</cell><cell>
?G. C. Eilmar (or Bach). ?Composed at M&uuml;hlhausen.
</cell><cell>
Acts xvii;. 28; Psalm xc. 12; Isaiah xxxviii. 1; Ecclesiasticus xiv. 17; Rev. xxii; 20; Psalm xxxi. 5; St. Luke xxiii. 43; Stanza i. of Luther's hymn, <q>Mit Fried' und Freud' ich fahr' dahin</q>; Stanza vii;. of Adam Reissner's hymn, <q>In dich hab' ich gehoffet, Herr.</q> A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
18
</cell><cell>
1714 (or 1713). Sexagesima.
</cell><cell>
Gleich wie der Regen und Schnee vom Himmel f&auml;llt (Isaiah lv. 10-11).
</cell><cell>
Erdmann Neumeister <q>F&uuml;nffache Kirchen-Andachten</q> (Leipzig, 1716) (Ser. iii.).
</cell><cell>
Isaiah lv. 10, 11; four clauses of the Litany; Stanza viii. of Lazarus Spengler's hymn, <q>Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt</q>; rest of libretto original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="189" />

<row><cell>
*160
</cell><cell>
1714 (or 1713). Easter Day.
</cell><cell>
Ich weiss, dass mein Erl&ouml;ser lebt.
</cell><cell>
Erdmann Neumeister <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.</foreign>, Ser. I.). Slight verbal alterations by Bach.
</cell><cell>
Original throughout.   Tenor Solo.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
21
</cell><cell>
1714. Third S. after Trinity and General Use.
</cell><cell>
Ich  hatte  viel Bek&uuml;mmernis (Psalm xciv. 19)
</cell><cell>
Spitta (i. 531) attributes text to Salomo Franck.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I,:</emph> Psalm xciv. 19; Psalm xlii. 5. <emph>Part ii.:</emph> Psalm cxvi. 7; Rev. v. 12, 13; Stanzas ii. and v. of Georg Neumark's hymn, <q>Wer nur den lieben Gott lasst walten</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*199 N.B.G.
</cell><cell>
c. 1714. Eleventh S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut.
</cell><cell>
The title is from a Neumeister text for this Sunday. ?By Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanza  iii. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Wo soll ich fliehen hin</q>; rest of libretto original. Soprano solo.
</cell></row>



<row><cell>
61
</cell><cell>
1714. First S. in Advent.
</cell><cell>
Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland.
</cell><cell>
Erdmann Neumeister, <q>F&uuml;nffache Kirchen-Andachten</q> (Leipzig, 1716), (Ser. IV).
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Luther's hymn, <q>Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland</q>; Rev. iii. 20; part of stanza vii. of Philipp Nicolai's hymn, <q>Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern</q>; rest original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
142
</cell><cell>
1714 (or 1712). Christmas Day.
</cell><cell>
Uns ist ein Kind geboren (Isaiah ix. 6).
</cell><cell>
Erdmann Neumeister <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.,</foreign> Ser. I.). Textually, the last three movements are altered, perhaps by Bach, whose authorship of the Cantata, however, is questioned (<title>Bach-Jahrbuch,</title> 1912, p. 132).
</cell><cell>
Isaiah ix. 9; Psalm lxix. 30; Stanza v. of Caspar Fuger's hymn, <q>Wir Christenleut</q>; rest of libretto original (see Spitta i. 630 on Bach's emendations). A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="190" />

<row><cell>
182
</cell><cell>
1715 (or l714).Palm Sunday (used also for the Annunciation).
</cell><cell>
Himmelsk&ouml;nig, sei wilkommen.
</cell><cell>
Spitta (i.   539) suggests Salomo Franck, whose characteristics it displays.
</cell><cell>
Psalm xl. 7, 8; Stanza xxxiii. of Paul Stockmann's hymn, <q>Jesu Leiden, Pein und Tod</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
31
</cell><cell>
1715. Easter Day. Revised in ?1723. (Schweitzer, ii. 141n).
</cell><cell>
Der Himmel lacht,  die Erde jubiliret.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck (<q>Evangelisches Andachts-Opffer</q> Weimar, 1715, p. 75).
</cell><cell>
Stanza v. (posthumous) of Nikolaus Herman's hymn, <q>Wenn mein St&uuml;ndlem vorhanden ist</q>; rest of libretto original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
&dagger;l85
</cell><cell>
1716. Fourth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Barmherziges Herze der ewigen Liebe.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.,</foreign>p. 128).
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Johannes Agricola's hymn, <q>Ich ruf' zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
161
</cell><cell>
1715. Sixteenth S. after Trinity (also for Purification).
</cell><cell>
Komm, du s&uuml;sse Todesstunde.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.,</foreign> p. 162); verbal alterations by Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanza   iv.   of   Christoph   Knoll's   hymn, <q>Herzlich thut mich verlangen</q>; rest original. A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;162
</cell><cell>
1715. Twentieth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ach, ich sehe, jetzt da ich zur Hochzeit gehe.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.,</foreign> p. 172).
</cell><cell>
Stanza vii. of Johann Georg Albinus' hymn, <q>Alle Menschen m&uuml;ssen sterben</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;163
</cell><cell>
1715. Twenty-third S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Nur Jedem das Seine.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.,</foreign> p. 182).
</cell><cell>
Stanza xi. (suggested by Spitta i. 557) of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Wo soll ich fliehen hin</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*132
</cell><cell>
1715. Fourth S. in Advent.
</cell><cell>
Bereitet die Wege, bereitet die Bahn.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.,</foreign> p. 8)
</cell><cell>
Stanza v.  of Elisabethe Cruciger's hymn, <q>Herr Christ, der einig' Gott's Sohn</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="191" />

<row><cell>
*152
</cell><cell>
1715 (or 1714). S. after Christmas
</cell><cell>
Tritt auf die Glaubensbahn.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.,</foreign> p. 19).
</cell><cell>
Original throughout. S. and B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
&dagger;155
</cell><cell>
1716. Second S. after the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Mein Gott, wie lang', ach lange.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.,</foreign> p. 32).
</cell><cell>
Stanza xii. of Paul Speratus' hymn, <q>Es ist das Heil uns kommen her</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;59
</cell><cell>
1716. WhitSunday Expanded in ?1736 (No.74 <foreign lang="la">infra</foreign>).
</cell><cell>
Wer mich liebet, der wird mein Wort halten (St. John xiv. 23).
</cell><cell>
Erdmann Neumeister (<q>Funffache Kirchen-Andachten,</q> Ser. IV.).
</cell><cell>
St. John xiv. 23; Stanza i. of Luther's hymn, <q>Komm, heiliger Geist, Herre Gott</q>; rest of libretto original. S. and B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
70
</cell><cell>
1716. Second S. in Advent; later (c. 1723). Twenty-sixth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wachet, betet, betet, wachet.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck (<q>Evangelische Sonn- und Fest-Tages Andachten,</q> Weimar, 1717, p. 4) (opening chorus and Arias only). Recitativi added by a later (c. 1723) hand (? Bach).
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.: </emph> Stanza x. of the anonymous hymn, <q>Freu' dich sehr, O meine Seele.</q> <emph>Part. ii.:</emph> Stanza v. of Christian Keimann's hymn, <q>Meinen Jesum lass' ich nicht.</q> Rest of libretto, both parts, original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
147
</cell><cell>
1716. Fourth S. in Advent; later (c. ?1727). Feast of the Visitation.
</cell><cell>
Herz und Mund und That und Leben.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck <foreign lang="la">(Ibid.).</foreign> (Opening chorus and first three Arias only). Recitativi and fourth Aria added by a later hand (?Bach).
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Stanza vi. of Martin Janus' hymn, <q>Jesu, meiner Seelen Wonne.</q> <emph>Part II.:</emph> Stanza xvii. of the same hymn.  Rest of libretto, both parts, original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="192" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;158
</cell><cell>
c. 1708-16. Purification of the B.V.M.; later (at Leipzig) adapted to Easter Tuesday
</cell><cell>
Der Friede sei mit dir.
</cell><cell>
Spitta  (ii. 688) suggests Franck as author of the Aria and following Recitativo, both of which bear on the Gospel for the Purification.  The opening Recitative and choice of the concluding Choral, both of which are relevant to the Gospel for Easter Tuesday, must be attributed to a later hand (?Bach).
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Johann Georg Albinus' hymn, <q>Welt, ade! ich bin dein m&uuml;de</q>; Stanza v. of Luther's hymn, <q>Christ lag in Todesbanden</q>; rest of libretto original. S. and B. Soli.
</cell></row>
</table>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">(4) COMPOSED AT C&Ouml;THEN. (See also Nos. 22 and 23.)</head>


<table cols="5" rend="rules:all;
      latexcolumns: '|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|';
      tblcolumns: 'l|l|l|l|l(30m)'">

<row><cell>
No.
</cell><cell>
Date.
</cell><cell>
Title.
</cell><cell>
Author of Libretto.
</cell><cell>
Composition of the Text.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
173
</cell><cell>
c. 1718. Birthday Serenade; new text (c. 1730) for Whit Monday.
</cell><cell>
Erh&ouml;tes Fleisch und Blut.
</cell><cell>
The music of the Cantata is that of the Birthday Serenade, <q>Durehlaucht'-ster Leopold</q> (omitting numbers 5 and 6). Cantata text probably by Bach.
</cell><cell>
Original throughout.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
47
</cell><cell>
?1720. Seventeenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wer sich selbst erh&ouml;het, der soll erniedriget werden (St. Luke xiv. 11).
</cell><cell>
Johann Friedrich Helbig (<q>Aufmunterung zur Andacht,</q> Eisenach, 1720, p. 114.
</cell><cell>
St. Luke xiv. 11; Stanza xi. of anonymous (?Hans Sachs) hymn, <q>Warum betrubst du dich, mein Herz</q>; rest original. S. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="193" />

<row><cell>
141
</cell><cell>
1721 or 1722. Third S. in Advent.
</cell><cell>
Das ist je gewisslich wahr (I. Timothy i. 15).
</cell><cell>
Johann Fr. Helbig <foreign lang="la">Ibid.</foreign>, p. 5). Bach's authorship of the music is questioned (<title>Bach-Jahrbuch,</title> 1912).
</cell><cell>
1 Timothy i. 15; rest of libretto is original. The concluding Choral is omitted by Bach. It should be <q>Christe, du Lamm Gottes</q> (Spitta. ii. 15n.). A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
134
</cell><cell>
c. 1717-22. Secular Cantata; later adapted for Easter Tuesday (c. 1731).
</cell><cell>
Ein   Herz,    das   seinen Jesum lebend weiss.
</cell><cell>
?Bach
</cell><cell>
Text original throughout.  A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>
</table>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">(5) COMPOSED AT LEIPZIG. 1723-34. (See also Nos. 31, 70, 134, 147,  158, 173.)</head>


<table cols="5" rend="rules:all;
      latexcolumns: '|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|';
      tblcolumns: 'l|l|l|l|l(30m)'">
	  
<row><cell>
No.
</cell><cell>
Date.
</cell><cell>
Title.
</cell><cell>
Author of Libretto.
</cell><cell>
Composition of the Text.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
22
</cell><cell>
1723. Quinquagesima. (<q>Estomihi</q>).
</cell><cell>
Jesus nahm zu sich die Zw&ouml;lfe (St. Luke xviii. 31). [See No. 31 (1715).]
</cell><cell>
?Bach (composed at C&ouml;then). Trial Cantata (February 7, 1723).
</cell><cell>
St. Luke xviii. 31, 34; Stanza v. of Elisabothe Gruciger's hymn, <q>Herr Christ, der einig' Gott's Sohn</q>; rest original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
75
</cell><cell>
1723 (May 30). First S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Die Elenden sollen essen (Psalm xxii. 26).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Psalm xxii. 26; Stanza v. of Samuel Rodigast's hymn, <q>Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan</q>; <emph>Part II.:</emph> Stanza v. of the same hymn (repeated); rest of libretto, both parts, original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
76
</cell><cell>
1723. Second S. after Trinity. Also for Reformation Festival.
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Die Himmel erzahlon die Ehre Gottes (Psalm xix. 1, 3).
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Psalm xix. 1,3; Stanza i. of Luther's hymn, <q>Es woll' uns Gott gen&auml;dig sein</q>; <emph>Part II.:</emph> Stanza iii. of the same hymn; rest of libretto original. See Spitta ii. 357n.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
24
</cell><cell>
1723.      Fourth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ein ungefarbt Gem&uuml;the.
</cell><cell>
Erdmann Neumeister (<q>F&uuml;nffache Kirchen-Andachten</q>) (Ser. IV.).
</cell><cell>
St. Matthew vii. 12; Stanza i. of Johann Heer-mann's hymn, <q>O Gott, du frommer Gott</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="194" />

<row><cell>
186
</cell><cell>
1723. Seventh S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Aergre dich, O Seele, nicht.
</cell><cell>
The opening chorus and first two Arias are by Salomo Franck (<q>Evangelische Sonn- und Fest-Tages,</q> p. 6), written for the Third S. in Advent, perhaps composed by Bach at Weimar. The remainder of the libretto was added in 1723 for the Seventh S. after Trinity. Both Gospels relate Christ's miracles.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Stanza xii. of Paul Speratus' hymn, <q>Es ist das Heil uns kommen her.</q>
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;164
</cell><cell>
1723 (or 1724). Thirteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ihr, die ihr euch von Christo nennet.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck (<q>Evangelisches Andachts-Opffer,</q> 1715, p. 152).
</cell><cell>
Stanza v. of Elisabethe Cruciger's hymn, <q>Herr Christ, der einig' Gott's Sohn</q>; rest of libretto original. Perhaps written at Weimar.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
119
</cell><cell>
1723. Inauguration of Town Council (Aug. 30).
</cell><cell>
Preise, Jerusalem, den Herrn (Psalm cxlvii. 12.)
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxlvii. 12-14; clauses xxii. and xxiii. of the <q>Te Deum</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
194
</cell><cell>
1723. Opening of the Organ at St&ouml;rmthal (November 2); later (1731) for Trinity Sunday. [See   No.   70 (1716).]
</cell><cell>
H&ouml;chsterw&uuml;nschtes Freudenfest.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Stanzas vi. and vii. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Treuer Gott, ich muss dir klagen</q>; <emph>Part II.:</emph> Stanzas ix. and x. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Wach auf, mein Herz, und singe.</q> Rest of libretto original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="195" />

<row><cell>
63
</cell><cell>
?1723.   Christmas Day.
</cell><cell>
Christen &auml;tzet diesen Tag.
</cell><cell>
?Bach. The opening two lines suggested by a poem in Joh. Jakob Bambach's <q>Geistliche Poesien</q> (Halle, 1720).
</cell><cell>
Original throughout.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
40
</cell><cell>
?1723. Feast of St. Stephen.
</cell><cell>
Dazu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes (1 John iii. 8).
</cell><cell>
Christian Weiss, senr. Wustmann (note 8) suggests Bach. Certainly same author as Nos. 64, 65 <emph>infra.</emph>
</cell><cell>
1 John iii. 8; Stanza iii. of Caspar Fuger's hymn, <q>Wir Christenleut'</q>; Stanza ii. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Schwing' dich auf zu deinem Gott</q>; Stanza iv. of Christian Keimann's hymn, <q>Freuet euch, ihr Christen alle</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
64
</cell><cell>
?1723. Feast of St. John the Evangelist.
</cell><cell>
Sehet, welch' eine Liebe hat uns der Vater erzeiget (1 John iii. 1).
</cell><cell>
Christian Weiss, senr. Certainly same author as Nos. 40 <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign> and 65 <foreign lang="la">infra.</foreign>
</cell><cell>
1 John &uuml;i. 1; Stanza v&uuml;. of Luther's hymn, <q>Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ</q>; Stanza i. of Georg Michael Pfefferkorn's hymn, <q>Was frag ich nach der Welt</q>; Stanza v. of Johann Franck's hymn, <q>Jesu, meine Freude</q>; rest of libretto original. S. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
16
</cell><cell>
?1724. New Year's Day. Spitta (ii. 386, 413) regards No. 190 <foreign lang="la">(infra) </foreign> as Bach's first Leipzig New Year Cantata, and dates No. 16, 1723-27.
</cell><cell>
Herr Gott dich loben wir.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
Clauses i. and ii. of Luther's <q>Te Deum</q>; Stanza vi. of Paul Eber's hymn, <q>Helft mir Gott's G&uuml;te preisen</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<pb n="196" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;153
</cell><cell>
1724. Sunday after the Circumcision.
</cell><cell>
Schau', lieber Gott, wie meine Feind'.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanza  i.   of  David  Denicke's (?)  hymn,
<q>Schau', lieber Gott, wie meine Feind'</q>;
Isaiah xli. 10; Stanza v. of Paul Gerhardt's
hymn, <q>Befiehl du deine Wege</q>; Stanzas
xi.  and xii.  (as three verses) of Martin
Moller's (?) hymn, <q>Ach Gott, wie manches
Herzeleid</q>; rest of libretto original.
A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
65
</cell><cell>
1724.   Feast of the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Sie werden aus Saba Alle kommen (Isaiah lx. 6).
</cell><cell>
?Christian  Weiss, senr. Wustmann (note 23) attributes text to author
of Nos. 40 and 64 <emph>supra,</emph> <emph>i.e. </emph>Bach.
</cell><cell>
Isaiah lx. 6;   Stanza iv. of the anonymous hymn, <q>Ein Kind geborn zu Bethlehem</q>;
Stanza x. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Ich hab' in Gottes Herz und Sinn</q>; rest original.    A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;154
</cell><cell>
1724. First S. after the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Mein liebster Jesus ist verloren.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.   Wustmann (note 25) attributes it to an anonymous author.
</cell><cell>
Stanza ii. of  Martin  Janus'  hymn, <q>Jesu, meiner Seelen Wonne</q>;  St. Luke &uuml;. 49;
Stanza vi. of Christian Keimann's hymn,
<q>Meinen Jesum lass' ich nicht</q>; rest original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;81
</cell><cell>
1724. Fourth S. after   the   Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Jesus schlaft, was soll ich hoffen?
</cell><cell>
?Bach. Wustmann  regards texts of Nos. 81 and 154 as being by the same hand (note 35).
</cell><cell>
St. Matthew viii. 26; Stanza ii. of Johann Franck's hymn, <q>Jesu, meine Freude</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;83
</cell><cell>
?1724. Feast of the Purification.
</cell><cell>
Erfreute Zeit im neuen Bunde.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
St. Luke ii. 29, 30;   Stanza iv. of Luther's hymn, <q>Mit Fried' und Freud' ich fahr'
dahin</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="197" />

<row><cell>
23
</cell><cell>
1724. Quinquagesima (<q>Estomihi</q>). ?Composed at C&ouml;then. Spitta (ii. 679) holds this, and not No. 22, to have been Bach's first Quinquagesima Cantata at Leipzig.
</cell><cell>
Du wahrer Gott und Davids Sohn.
</cell><cell>
?Bach
</cell><cell>
Three stanzas of <q>Christe, du Lamm Gottes</q>; rest of libretto original. S. A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
4
</cell><cell>
1724. Easter Day (<q>Am Osterfeste</q>)
</cell><cell>
Christ lag in Todesbanden
</cell><cell>
Luther.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. The seven stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
12
</cell><cell>
1724 (or 1725). Third S. after Easter
</cell><cell>
Weinen, Klagen, Sorgen, Zagen.
</cell><cell>
?Salomo Franck.
</cell><cell>
Acts xiv. 22; Stanza vi. of Samuel Rodigast's hymn, <q>Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
172
</cell><cell>
1724 (or 1725). Whit Sunday. Perhaps revised c. 1727-30 (see Schweitzer, ii. 162).
</cell><cell>
Erschallet ihr Lieder.
</cell><cell>
?Salomo Franck (Spitta ii. 398). Wustmann (note 73) does not support the conjecture.
</cell><cell>
St.  John xiv. 23  Stanza iv. of Philipp Nicolai's hymn, <q>Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern</q>; rest of libretto original. Organ obbligato.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
184
</cell><cell>
1724.  Whit Tuesday.
</cell><cell>
Erwunschtes Freudenlicht.
</cell><cell>
?Bach. An adaptation of an earlier secular Cantata (Spitta, ii. 399).
</cell><cell>
Stanza v&uuml;i. of Anark of Wildenfeis' (?) hymn, <q>O Herre Gott, dein g&ouml;ttlich Wort</q>; rest of libretto original. S. A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="198" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;165
</cell><cell>
?1724. Trinity Sunday.
</cell><cell>
O heil'ges Geist und Wasserbad
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck (<q>Evangelisches Andachte-Opffer</q>, 1715, p. 111)
</cell><cell>
Stanza v. of Ludwig Helmbold's hymn <q>Nun lasst uns Gott dem Herren</q>, rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
179
</cell><cell>
?1724. Eleventh S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Siehe zu, dass deine Gottesfurcht nicht Heuchelei sei (Ecclesiastes i. 28)
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Ecclesiastes i. 28, Stanza i. of Christph Tietze's hymn, <q>Ich armer Mensch, ich armer S&uuml;nder</q>, rest original S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
69
</cell><cell>
?1724. Twelfth S. after Trinity, <foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1730 adapted as a Ratswahl cantata.
</cell><cell>
Loben dem herren, meine Seele (Psalm cxlix. 1).
</cell><cell>
As extended in 1730 the text is in Picander's <q>Cantaten</q>, 1728-29. His authorship of the 1725 text is not therefore established.
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxlix. 1, Psalm cl. 4,6; Clauses i. and ii. of the <q>Te Deum</q>, Stanza ii. of Johann Hermann's hymn, <q>Jesu, nun sei gepreiset</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
190
</cell><cell>
c. 1725 (or 1724).  New Year's Day; revised to celebrate the Augsburg Confession Jubilee on June 25, 1730.
</cell><cell>
Singet dein Herrn ein neues Lied (Psalm cxlix. 1).
</cell><cell>
As extended in 1730 the text is in Picander's <q>Cantaten</q>, 1728-29.  His authorship of the 1725 text is not therefore established.
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxlix 1; Psalm cl. 4,6; Clauses i. and ii. of the <q>Te Deum</q>; Stanza ii. of of Johann Hermann's hymn, <q>Jesu, nun se gepreiset</q>, rest of libretto original.  A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;73.
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1725. Third S. after the Epiphany
</cell><cell>
Herr, wie du willt, so shick's mit mir.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.  Spitta's (ii. 414) attribution of the text to Picander is inadequately founded.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Caspar Bienemann's hymn, <q>Herr, wie du willt, so shick's mit mir</q>; Stanza ix. of Ludwig Helmhold's hymn, <q>Von Gott will ich nich lassen</q>; rest original. S. T. B. Soli
</cell></row>

<pb n="199" />

<row><cell>
144
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Septuagesima
</cell><cell>
Nimm was dein ist, und gehe hin (St. Matthew xx. 14).
</cell><cell>
Wustmann (note 37) suggests Picander, with Bach's additions. Schweitzer (ii. 200)
supposes that the music is adapted.
</cell><cell>
St. Matthew xx. 14; Stanza i. of Samuel Rodigast's hymn, <q>Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan</q>; Stanza i. of Albrecht of Brandenburg-Culmbach's hymn, <q>Was mein Gott will, das g'scheh' allzeit</q>; rest of libretto original. S. A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
181
</cell><cell>
1725. Sexagesima.
</cell><cell>
Leichtgesinnte Flattergeister.
</cell><cell>
?Picander.
</cell><cell>
Original throughout.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
67
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. First S. after Easter (<q>Quasi-modogeniti</q>).
</cell><cell>
Halt' im Gedachtniss Jesum Christ (2 Timothy ii. 8).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr. Certainly not Picander, as Spitta (ii. 417) suggests.
</cell><cell>
2 Timothy &uuml;. 8; Stanza i. of Nikolaus Herman's hymn, <q>Erschienen ist der herrlich' Tag</q>; Stanza i. of Jakob Ebert's hymn, <q>Du Friedenf&uuml;rst, Herr Jesu Christ</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
104
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Second S. after      Easter (<q>Misericordias Domini</q>).
</cell><cell>
Du Hirte Israel, h&ouml;re (Psalm lxxi. 1).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Psalm lxxx. 1; Stanza i. of Cornelius Becker's hymn, <q>Der Herr ist mein getreuer Hirt</q>; rest of libretto original. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger; 166
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Fourth S. after Easter (<q>Cantate</q>).
</cell><cell>
Wo gehest du hin? (St. John xvi. 6).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
St. John xvi. 5; Stanza iii. of Bartholom&auml;us Ringwaldt's hymn, <q>Herr Jesu Christ, ich weiss gar wohl</q>; Stanza i. of Emilie Juliane of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt's hymn, <q>Wer weiss, wie nahe mir mein Ende</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="200" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;86
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Fifth S. after Easter (<q>Rogate</q>).
</cell><cell>
Wahrlich, wahrlich, ich sage euch (St. John xvi. 23).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
St. John xvi. 23; Stanza xvi. of Georg Gr&uuml;enwald's hymn, <q>Kommt her zu mir, spricht Gottes Sohn</q>; Stanza xi. of Paul Speratus' hymn, <q>Es ist das Heil uns kommen her</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
44
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Sixth S. after Easter  (S. after the Ascension) (<q>Exaudi</q>).
</cell><cell>
Sie werden euch in den Bann  thun (St. John xvi. 2)
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
St. John xvi. 2; Stanza i. of Martin Moller's(?) hymn, <q>Ach Gott, wie manches Herzeleid</q>; Stanza xv. of  Paul Flemming's hymn, <q>In allen meinen Thaten</q>;  rest of the libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
20
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. First S. after Trinity.  In its existing form the work is c. 1735.
</cell><cell>
O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort.
</cell><cell>
Johann Rist (arranged). (?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata (2 Parts).  Stanzas i., xi.,  xvi.  are retained in  thoir original form.      Stanzas ii.-x. are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi. A. T. B. Soli.                         
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;167
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Feast of St. John Baptist (MidsummerDay)
</cell><cell>
Ihr Menschen, r&uuml;hmet Gottes liebe.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown. Spitta (ii. 423) remarks on the <q>vapid emptiness</q> of the text.
</cell><cell>
Stanza v. of Johann Graumann's hymn, <q>Nun lob', mein' Seel', den Herren</q>; rest of libretto original. The Choral is extended.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
136
</cell><cell>
c. 1725 (or  later). Eighth  S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Erforsche mich, Gott, und erfahre mein Herz (Psalm cxxxix. 23).
</cell><cell>
?Christian  Weiss,   senr. Schweitzer (ii. 200) supposes that the music is adapted.
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxxxix.  23; Stanza ix. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Wo  soll ich fliehen hin</q>;   rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="201" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;168
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Ninth S. after Trinity. Perhaps composed at Weimar.
</cell><cell>
Thue Rechnung! Donnerwort!
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck (<q>Evangelisches Andachts-Opffer,</q> 1715, p. 141).
</cell><cell>
Stanza  viii. of Bartholomaus Ringwaldt's hymn, <q>Herr Jesu Christ, du hochstes Gut</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
105
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Ninth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Herr, gehe nicht in's Gericht (Psalm cxliii. 2).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxliii. 2; Stanza xi. of Johann Rist's hymn, <q>Jesu, der du moine Seele</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
46
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Tenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Schauet doch und sehet, ob irgend ein Schmerz sei (Lam. i. 12).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Lamentations i. 12; Stanza ix. (apocryphal) of Balthasar Schnurr's hymn, <q>O grosser Gott von Macht</q>; rest original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
77
</cell><cell>
1725. Thirteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Du  sollst Gott, deinen Herren, lieben (St. Luke x. 27).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
St. Luke x. 27; Stanza viii. of David Denicke's (?) hymn, <q>Wenn einer alle Ding verst&uuml;nd</q> (posthumously added to Bach's text); rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
8
</cell><cell>
c. 1725.    Sixteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Liebster Gott, wann werd' ich sterben?
</cell><cell>
Caspar Neumann (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata.  Stanzas i. and v. are retained in their original form.  Stanzas ii.-iv. are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
148
</cell><cell>
c. 1725. Seventeenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Bringet dem Herrn Ehre seines Namens (Psalm xcvi. 8).
</cell><cell>
The groundwork is by Picander (<q>Sammlung Erbaulicher Gedancken,</q> Leipzig, 1725, p. 428), arranged by Bach. This is the earliest ascertained association of Bach and Picander (date ?Sept. 23, 1725).
</cell><cell>
Psalm xcvi. 8, 9; Stanza xi. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Wo soll ich fliehen hin</q> (suggested by Spitta, ii. 694; wanting in the score); rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="202" />

<row><cell>
72
</cell><cell>
c. 1726 (or earlier). Third S. after the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Alles nur nach Gottes Willen.
</cell><cell>
Salomo Franck (<q>Evangelisches Andachts-Opffer,</q> 1715, p. 35).
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Albrecht of Brandenburg-Culmbach's hymn, <q>Was mein Gott will, das g'scheh' allzeit</q>; rest original. A. S. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
19
</cell><cell>
1726. Feast of St. Michael the Archangel.
</cell><cell>
Es erhub sich ein Streit.
</cell><cell>
The groundwork of the text is a libretto for the season published by Picander in 1725. The Cantata version probably is by Bach himself.  Spitta's (ii. 344) attribution of it to Picander is ill-founded.
</cell><cell>
Stanza ix. of the anonymous hymn, <q>Freu' dich sehr, O meine Seele</q>; rest of libretto original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
195
</cell><cell>
?c. 1726. For a Wedding.
</cell><cell>
Dem Gerechten muss das Licht (Psalm xcvii. 11).
</cell><cell>
?Bach. Spitta (ii. 469) supposes that the music is adapted.
</cell><cell>
Psalm xcvii. 11, 12; Stanza i. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Nun danket all' und bringet Ehr'</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;157
</cell><cell>
1727. Feast of the Purification. Also for a Funeral.
</cell><cell>
Ich lasse dich nicht, du segnest mich denn (Gen. xxxii. 26).
</cell><cell>
Picander (<q>Satyrische Gedichte,</q> vol. i. p. 210).
</cell><cell>
Genesis xxxii. 26; Stanza vi. of Christian Keimann's hymn, <q>Meinen Jesum lass' ich nicht</q>; rest by Picander. T. B. Soli
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
37
</cell><cell>
c. 1727. (Schweitzer ii. 260, dates it 1728-34). Ascension Day. [See Nos. 147 (1716) and 172 (1724).]
</cell><cell>
Wer da glaubet und getauft wird (St. Mark xvi. 16).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
St. Mark xvi. 16; Stanza v. of Philipp Nicolai's hymn, <q>Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern</q>; Stanza iv. of Johann Kolross' hymn, <q>Ich dank' dir, lieber Herre</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="203" />

<row><cell>
198
</cell><cell>
1727. October 17.
</cell><cell>
Trauer-Musik: for Queen Christiane Eberhardine of Poland <note place="foot">
General mourning for the Queen lasted from Sept. 7, 1727, to Jan. 6, 1728. No Cantatas were sung in the period.
</note>
</cell><cell>
Prof. J. C. Gottsched.  (d. Sept. 7, 1727).
</cell><cell>
Original throughout.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
93
</cell><cell>
?1728. Fifth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten.
</cell><cell>
Georg Neumark (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata; Stanzas i., iv., v., vii. of Neumark's hymn are retained in their original form; Stanzas ii., iii., vi. are inserted or paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;Incomplete
</cell><cell>
?1728. Christmas Day.
</cell><cell>
Ehre sei Gott in der H&ouml;he (St. Luke ii. 14).
</cell><cell>
Picander (<q>Cantaten,</q> 1728-29, p. 71).
</cell><cell>
St. Luke ii. 14; Stanza iv. of Caspar Ziegler's hymn, <q>Ich freue mich in dir</q>; rest original. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;159
</cell><cell>
?1729. Quinquagesima (<q>Estomihi</q>).
</cell><cell>
Sehet, wir geh'n hinauf nach Jerusalem (St. Luke xviii. 31).
</cell><cell>
Picander (<foreign lang="la">Ibid.</foreign>, p. 106).
</cell><cell>
St. Luke xviii. 31; Stanza vi. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden</q>; Stanza xxxiii. of Paul Stockmann's hymn, <q>Jesu Leiden, Pein und Tod</q>; rest original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
145
</cell><cell>
1729 (or 1730). Easter Tuesday (<q>Am Osterfeste</q>)
</cell><cell>
So du mit deinem Munde bekennest Jesum (Romans x. 9), <emph>or</emph> Auf, mein Herz! des Herren Tag, <emph>or</emph> Ich lebe, mein Herze.
</cell><cell>
Picander (<q>Cantaten,</q> 1728-29, p. 125), with the addition (by Bach) of the opening Choral and Bible verse. See Spitta, ii. 442 n.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Caspar Neumann's hymn, <q>Auf, mein Herz! des Herren Tag</q>; Romans x. 9; Stanza xiv. of Nikolaus Herman's hymn, <q>Erschienen ist der herrlich' Tag</q>; rest of libretto by Picander. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
171
</cell><cell>
1730 (or 1731) Feast of the Circumcision (New Year's Day).
</cell><cell>
Gott, wie dein Name, so ist auch dein Ruhm (Psalm xlviii. 10).
</cell><cell>
Picander (<foreign lang="la">Ibid.</foreign> p. 81).
</cell><cell>
Psalm xlviii. 10; Stanza iii. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Jesu, nun sei gepreiset</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="204" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;156
</cell><cell>
1730 (or 1729). Third S. after the Epiphany.[See No. 173 (1718).]
</cell><cell>
Ich steh' mit einem Fussim Grabe.
</cell><cell>
Picander (<foreign lang="la">Ibid.</foreign>Ibid., p. 91).
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Joh. Hermann Schein's hymn, <q>Mach's mit mir, Gott, nach deiner G&uuml;t'</q>; Stanza i. of Caspar Bienemann's hymn, <q>Herr, wie du will't, so schick's mit mir</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
120
</cell><cell>
1730. Inauguration of the Town Council (Aug. 24). Used also for Augsburg Confession celebration on June 26, 1730. [See Nos. 69 (1724), 190 (1725).]
</cell><cell>
Gott, man lobet dich in der Stille (Psalm lxv. 1).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Psalm lxv. i.;  clauses xx.-xxiii. of the <q>Te Deum</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;l88
</cell><cell>
1730 (or 1731). Twenty-first S. after Trinity. Incorporates  older instrumental material.
</cell><cell>
Ich habe meine Zuver-sicht.
</cell><cell>
Picander (<q>Cantaten,</q> 1728-29, p. 47). Music probably by Wilhelm Friedemann Bach to a large extent.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of  Sigismund Weing&auml;rtner's (?) hymn, <q>Auf meinen lieben Gott</q>; rest of libretto original. Organ obbligato.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
80
</cell><cell>
1730. Reformation Festival (c. Oct.31). Composed mainly at Weimar (1716).
</cell><cell>
Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott.
</cell><cell>
Luther and Salomo Franck (<q>Evangelisches Andachts-Opffer,</q> p. 60).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., ii., iii., iv. of Luther's hymn, <q>Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott,</q> are set in their original form; rest of libretto by Franck.
</cell></row>

<pb n="205" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;89
</cell><cell>
c. 1730. Twenty-second S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Was soll ich aus dir machen, Ephraim? (Hosea xi. 8).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Hosea xi. 8; Stanza vii. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Wo soll ich fliehen hin</q>; rest of libretto original. S. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;52
</cell><cell>
<emph>c. </emph>1730. Twenty-third S. after Trinity. Incorporates older instrumental material.
</cell><cell>
Falsche Welt, dir trau ich nicht.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Adam Reissner's hymn, <q>In dich hab' ich gehoffet, Herr</q>; rest of libretto original. Soprano Solo.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
36
</cell><cell>
c. 1730. First S. in Advent.
</cell><cell>
Schwingt freudig euch empor.
</cell><cell>
The opening Chorus and three Arias are adaptations by Bach of a secular Ode, having the same title, written by Picander and performed Nov. 30, 1720.  The four Chorals replace Picander's original Recitativi. The music (excepting the Recitativi and final Chorus of the Ode) of the two works is identical.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Stanza i. of Luther's hymn, <q>Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland</q>; Stanza vi. of Philipp Nicolai's hymn, <q>Wie schon leuchtet der Morgenstern</q>; <emph>Part II.:</emph> Stanzas vi. and viii. of Luther's hymn; remaining movements adapted by Bach from Picander.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
Incomplete
</cell><cell>
c. 1730? For a Wedding.
</cell><cell>
O ewiges Feuer, O Ursprung der Liebe.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown. See No. 34 <foreign lang="la">infra </foreign> (c. 1740).
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxxviii. 4, 5, 6; Benediction; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
*82
</cell><cell>
c. 1731. Feast of the Purification.
</cell><cell>
Ich habe genug.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
Original throughout. Spitta (ii. 346) points out that the Aria <q>Schlummert ein</q> seems to have been suggested by a text by Johann Jakob Rambach for the same season. Bass Solo.
</cell></row>


<pb n="206" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;84
</cell><cell>
1731 (or 1732). Septuagesima.
</cell><cell>
Ich bin vergn&uuml;gt mit meinem Gl&uuml;cke.
</cell><cell>
A revision (?by Bach) of a text by Picander (<q>Cantaten,</q> 1728-29, p. 101).
</cell><cell>
Stanza xii. of Emilie Juliane of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt's hymn, <q>Wer weiss, wie nahe mir mein Ende</q>; rest original. Soprano Solo.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
66
</cell><cell>
1731 (not 1735). Easter Monday. [See No. 134 (1717-22).]
</cell><cell>
Erfreut euch, ihr Herzen.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanza iii. of the hymn, <q>Christ ist erstanden</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;42
</cell><cell>
1731 (not c. 1740). First S. after Easter. (<q>Quasi-modogeniti</q>).
</cell><cell>
Am Abend aber desselbigen Sabbaths (St. John xx. 19).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.  Wustmann (note 37) suggests Bach.
</cell><cell>
St. John xx. 19;  Stanza i. of Joh. Michael Altenburg's hymn,  <q>Verzage nicht, du Hauflein klein</q>; Stanza i.  of  Luther's Antiphon, <q>Verleih' uns   Frieden</q> and addendum; rest original.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
112
</cell><cell>
1731. Second S. after Easter (<q>Misericordias Domini</q>).
</cell><cell>
Der  Herr  ist  mein  getreuer Hirt (Psalm xxiii.).
</cell><cell>
Wolfgang Meusel.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata.  The  five stanzas  of  the hymn are set in their original form.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;174
</cell><cell>
1731 (or 1732). Whit Monday.  Incorporates older instrumental material. [See No. 194 (1723).]
</cell><cell>
Ich liebe den Hochsten von ganzem Gem&uuml;the.
</cell><cell>
Picander (<q>Cantaten,</q> 1728-29, p. 147).
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Martin Schalling's hymn, <q>Herzlich lieb hab' ich dich, O Herr</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="207" />

<row><cell>
9
</cell><cell>
?1731 Sixth S. after Trinity
</cell><cell>
Es ist das Heil uns kommen her.
</cell><cell>
Paul Speratus (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and xii. are set in their original form. The intermediate stanzas are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
102
</cell><cell>
?1731. Tenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Herr, deine Augen sehen nach dem Glauben (Jeremiah v. 3).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr. Spitta (ii. 464) suggests Picander.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.: </emph> Jeremiah v. 3; Romans ii. 4, 5; <emph>Part II.:</emph> Stanzas vi. and vii. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>So wahrichlebe, spricht dein Gott</q>; rest original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*35
</cell><cell>
?1731.   Twelfth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Geist und Seele wird verwirret.
</cell><cell>
The probability that the Cantata is a converted chamber music composition supports the inference that Bach wrote the text. See Spitta, ii. 447.
</cell><cell>
Original  throughout  (2  parts).  Alto  Solo and Organ obbligato.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
25
</cell><cell>
c. 1731. Fourteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Es ist nichts gesundes an meinem Leibe (Psalm xxxviii. 3).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Psalm  xxxviii. 3; Stanza xii. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Treuer Gott, ich muss dir klagen</q>; rest of libretto original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
29
</cell><cell>
1731. Inauguration of the Town Council (Aug. 27).  Incorporates older instrumental material.
</cell><cell>
Wir danken dir, Gott (Psalm lxxv. i).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, Sr.
</cell><cell>
Pslam lxxv. 1; Stanza v. (posthumous) of Johann Graumann's hymn <q>Nun lob' mein Seel' den Herren</q>, rest of libretto original.  Organ obbligato.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
*51
</cell><cell>
1731 (or 1732). Fifteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Jauchzet Gott in allen Landen.
</cell><cell>
?Bach. A version for Michaelmas (?1737) also exists. See Spitta, ii. 473n.
</cell><cell>
Stanza  v. of Johann Graumann's hymn, <q>Nun lob', mein' Seel', den Herren</q>; rest of libretto original. Soprano Solo.
</cell></row>

<pb n="208" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;27
</cell><cell>
1731.   Sixteenths, after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wer weiss, wie nahe mir mein Ende.
</cell><cell>
?Bach. The  first Aria is suggested by a Neumeister stanza (<q>Kirchen-Andachten,</q> p. 294). See Spitta, ii. 451.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Emilie Juliane of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt's hymn, <q>Wer weiss, wie nahe mir mein Ende</q>;  Stanza i. of Joh. Georg Albinus' hymn, <q>Welt ade! ich bin dein m&uuml;de</q>; rest of libretto original.    Organ obbligato.    Choral extended.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;169
</cell><cell>
1731 (or 1732). Eighteenth S. after Trinity. 
</cell><cell>
Gott   soll allein mein Herzehaben.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Stanza iii. of Luther's hymn, <q>Nun bitten wir den heiligen Geist</q>; rest of libretto original.  Alto Solo and Organ obbligato.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
149
</cell><cell>
1731. Feast of St. Michael the Arch-angel.
</cell><cell>
Man singet mit Freuden vom Sieg (Psalm cxviii. 15).
</cell><cell>
Christian  Weiss,  senr. First Chorus borrowed from <q>Was mir behagt.</q>
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxviii. 15, 16; Stanza iii. of Martin Schalling's hymn, <q>Herzlich lieb hab' ich dich, O Herr</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;56
</cell><cell>
1731 (or 1732). Nineteenth S. after  Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ich will den Kreuzstab gerne tragen.
</cell><cell>
?Bach, working on a Neumeister text (<q>Kirchen-Andachten,</q> p. 514).
</cell><cell>
Stanza vi. of Johann Franck's hymn, <q>Du, O schones Weltgeb&auml;ude</q>; rest of libretto original. Bass Solo.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*49
</cell><cell>
c. 1731. Twentieth S. after Trinity. Incorporates older instrumental material.
</cell><cell>
Ich geh' und suche mit Verlangen.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Stanza vii. of Philipp Nicolai's hymn, <q>Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern</q>;  rest of libretto original. S.  B. Soli and Organ obbligato.
</cell></row>

<pb n="209" />

<row><cell>
109
</cell><cell>
c. 1731. Twenty-first S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ich glaube, lieber Herre, hilf meinem Unglauben (St. Mark ix. 24).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
St. Mark ix. 24; Stanza vii. of Lazarus Spengler's hymn, <q>Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt</q>; rest original. A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;55
</cell><cell>
1731 (or 1732). Twenty-second S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ich  armor Mensch, ich S&uuml;ndenknecht.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Stanza vi. of Johann Rist's hymn, <q>Werde munter, mein Gemuthe</q>; rest of libretto original. Tenor Solo.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
140
</cell><cell>
1731 (or later). Twenty-seventh S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme.
</cell><cell>
Philipp Nicolai (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. All three stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form. The rest of the libretto is original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>


<row><cell>
129
</cell><cell>
1732. Trinity Sunday.
</cell><cell>
Gelobet sei der Herr.
</cell><cell>
Johannes Olearius.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. The five stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form. S. A. B. Soli. 
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
39
</cell><cell>
1732 (not c. 1740). First S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brod (Isaiah lviii. 7).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr. Schweitzer (ii. 343) attributes the text to Picander.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Isaiah lviii. 7, 8; <emph>Part II.:</emph> Hebrews xiii. 16; Stanza vi. of David Denicke's hymn, <q>Kommt, lasst euch den Herren lehren</q>; rest of libretto original. S. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
177
</cell><cell>
1732. Fourth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ich ruf' zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ.
</cell><cell>
Johannes Agricola.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. The five stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form. S. A. T. Soli. 
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;88
</cell><cell>
1732.  Fifth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Siehe, ich will viel Fischer aussenden (Jer. xvi. 16).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Jeremiah xvi. 16; <emph>Part II.:</emph> St. Luke v. 10; Stanza vii. of Georg Neumark's hymn, <q>Wer nur den lieben Gott lasst walten</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*170
</cell><cell>
?1732. Sixth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Vergn&uuml;gte Ruh, beliebte Seelenlust.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Original throughout. See Spitta, ii. 453n. Alto Solo and Organ obbligato.
</cell></row>

<pb n="210" />

<row><cell>
187
</cell><cell>
1732. Seventh S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Es wartet Alles auf dich (Psalm civ. 27).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.  Schweitzer (ii. 343) attributes the text to Picander.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.: </emph> Psalm civ. 27, 28;  <emph>Part II.: </emph> St. Matthew vi. 31, 32; Stanzas iv. and vi. of the anonymous hymn, <q>Singen wir aus Herzensgrund</q>; rest original. S. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
137
</cell><cell>
?1732. Twelfth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Lobe   den  Herren, den m&auml;chtigen  K&ouml;nig derEhren.
</cell><cell>
Joachim Neander.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. The five stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form. S. A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
95
</cell><cell>
?1732. Sixteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Christus, der ist mein Leben.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of the anonymous hymn, <q>Christus, der ist mein Leben</q>; Stanza i. of Luther's hymn, <q>Mit Fried' und Freud' ich fahr' dahin</q>; Stanza i. of Valerius Herberger's hymn, <q>Valet will ich dir geben</q>; Stanza iv. of Nikolaus Herman's hymn, <q>Wenn mein St&uuml;ndlein vorhanden ist</q>; rest original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
98
</cell><cell>
<emph>c. </emph>1732. Twenty-first S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Samuel Rodigast's hymn, <q>Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan</q>;  rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;60
</cell><cell>
1732. Twenty-fourth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Johann Rist's hymn, <q>O Ewigkeit du Donnerwort</q>; Psalm cxix. 166; Revelation xiv. 13; Stanza v. of Franz Joachim Burmeister's hymn, <q>Es ist genug</q>;  rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="211" />

<row><cell>
102
</cell><cell>
<emph>c.</emph> 1733. Occasion not specified.
</cell><cell>
Nun danket alle Gott.
</cell><cell>
Martin Rinkart.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. The three stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form. S. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*58
</cell><cell>
1733. Sunday after the Circumcision.
</cell><cell>
Ach Gott, wie manches Herzeleid.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Martin Moller's(?) hymn, <q>Ach Gott, wie manches Herzeleid</q>; Stanza ii. of Martin Behm's hymn, <q>O Jesu Christ, mein's Lebens Licht</q>; rest original. S. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
99
</cell><cell>
<emph>c.</emph> 1733. Fifteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan.
</cell><cell>
Samuel Rodigast (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and vi. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening stanzas are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
191
</cell><cell>
<emph>c.</emph> 1733. Christmas Day (<q>Am Weinachtsfeste</q>).
</cell><cell>
Gloria in excelsis Deo.
</cell><cell>
St. Luke ii. 14.
</cell><cell>
The <q>Gloria</q> of the B minor Mass.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
117
</cell><cell>
<emph>c.</emph> 1733. Occasion not specified. 
</cell><cell>
Sei Lob und Ehr' dem hochsten Gut.
</cell><cell>
Johann Jakob Sch&uuml;tz.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. The nine stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
97
</cell><cell>
1734. ?For a Wedding, or general use.
</cell><cell>
In allen meinen Thaten.
</cell><cell>
Paul Flemming. See Schweitzer, ii. 242n.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. The nine stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*54
</cell><cell>
1723-34.   Occasion not specified.
</cell><cell>
Wideratehe doch der Sunde.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Original throughout. Alto Solo.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
*53
</cell><cell>
1723-34. ?For a Funeral.
</cell><cell>
Schlage doch, gew&uuml;nschte Stunde.
</cell><cell>
?Salomo Franck.
</cell><cell>
A single eight-lined original stanza. Alto Solo.
</cell></row>
</table>
</div>

<div>
<pb n="212" />
<head type="sub">(6) COMPOSED AT LEIPZIG: 1735-50</head>


<table cols="5" rend="rules:all;
      latexcolumns: '|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|p{1.8cm}|';
      tblcolumns: 'l|l|l|l|l(30m)'">

<row><cell>
No.
</cell><cell>
Date.
</cell><cell>
Title.
</cell><cell>
Author of Libretto.
</cell><cell>
Composition of the Text.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
43
</cell><cell>
1735. New Year's Day.
</cell><cell>
Lobe den Herrn, meine Seele (Psalm cxlvi. 1).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr. Wustmann (note 19) suggests Bach.
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxlvi. 1, 5, 10;  Stanzas i. and iii. of Jakob Ebert's  hymn, <q>Du  Friedefurst, Herr Jesu Christ</q>; the rest of the libretto (two Arias) original. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
14
</cell><cell>
1735. Fourth S. after the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
War' Gott nicht mit uns diese Zeit (Psalm cxxiv.).
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and iii. are set in their original form. Stanza ii. is paraphrased in the intervening Arias and Recitativo. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;85
</cell><cell>
1735. Second S. after Easter. (<q>Misericordias Domini</q>).
</cell><cell>
Ich bin ein guter Hirt (St. John x. 11).
</cell><cell>
Spitta (iii. 71) and Schweitzer (ii. 331n) attribute the text to Marianne von Ziegler.          Wustmann (note 60) disagrees.
</cell><cell>
St. John x. 11; Stanza i. of Cornelius Becker's hymn, <q>Derr Herr ist mein getreuer Hirt</q>; Stanza iv. of Ernst Christoph Homburg's hymn, <q>Ist Gott mein Schild und Helfersmann</q>;  rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
103
</cell><cell>
?1735. Third S. after Easter (<q>Jubilate</q>).
</cell><cell>
Ihr werdet weinen und heulen (St. John xvi. 20).
</cell><cell>
Marianne von Ziegler (<q>Versuch in gebundener Schreibart,</q> Leipzig,1728). Emended by Bach.
</cell><cell>
St. John xvi. 20;   Stanza ix. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Barmherzger Vater, hochster Gott</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
108
</cell><cell>
?1735. Fourth S. after Easter. (<q>Cantate</q>).
</cell><cell>
Es ist euch gut, dass ich hingehe (St. John xvi. 7).
</cell><cell>
Marianne von Ziegler <emph>(Ibid.).</emph> Emended  by Bach.
</cell><cell>
St. John xvi. 7, 13;  Stanza x. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Gott Vater, sende deinen Geist</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="213" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;87
</cell><cell>
?1735. Fifth S. after Easter (<q>Rogate</q>)
</cell><cell>
Bisher habt ihr nichts gebeten in meinem Namen (St. John xvi. 24).
</cell><cell>
Marianne von Ziegler <emph>(Ibid.).</emph> Emended  by Bach.
</cell><cell>
St. John xvi. 24,33; Stanza ix. of Heinrich M&uuml;ller's hymn <q>Selig ist die Seele</q>; rest of libretto original.  A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
43
</cell><cell>
1735. Ascension Day.
</cell><cell>
Gott f&auml;hret auf mit Jauchzen (Psalm xlvii. 5).
</cell><cell>
?Bach.  Schweitzer (ii. 331n) wrongly attributes text to Marianne von Ziegler.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.</emph>: Pslm xlvii. 5,6; St. Mark xvi. 19; <emph>Part II.</emph>: Stanzas i. and xiii. of Johann Rist's hymn, <q>Du Lebenf&uuml;st, Herr Jesu Christ</q>, rest of libretto original, excepting the second, third, and fourth Arias.  Original portion perhaps by Bach.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
11
</cell><cell>
c. 1735. Ascension Day.
</cell><cell>
Lobet Gott in seinen Reichen.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
St. Luke xxiv. 50-52; Acts i. 9-11; Stanza iv. of Johann Rist's hymn, <q>Du Lebenf&uuml;st, Herr Jesu Christ</q>; Stanza vii. of Gottfried Wilhelm Sacer's hymn <q>Gott f&auml;hret auf gen Himmel</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
128
</cell><cell>
?1735. Ascension Day.
</cell><cell>
Auf Christi Himmelfahrt allein.
</cell><cell>
Marianne von Ziegler <emph>(Ibid.).</emph> Emended  by Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Josua Wegelin's hymn, <q>Auf Christi Himmelfahrt allein</q>; Stanza iv. of Matth&auml;us Avenarius's hymn, <q>O Jesu, meine Lust</q>; rest of libretto original.  A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;183
</cell><cell>
?1735. Sunday after the Ascension (<q>Exaudi</q>)
</cell><cell>
Sie werden euch in den Bann thun (St. John xvi. 2)
</cell><cell>
Marianne von Ziegler <emph>(Ibid.).</emph> Emended  by Bach.
</cell><cell>
S. John xvi. 2; Stanza v. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn <q>Zeuch ein zu deinen Thoren</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
74
</cell><cell>
?1735. Whit Sunday. An expansion of No. 59 (1716).
</cell><cell>
Wer mich liebst, der wird mein Wort halten (St. John xiv. 23).
</cell><cell>
Marianne von Ziegler <emph>(Ibid.).</emph> Emended  by Bach.
</cell><cell>
St. John 23, 28; Romans viii. 1; Stanza ii. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Gott Vater, sende deinen Geist</q> rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="214" />

<row><cell>
68
</cell><cell>
?1735. Whit Monday. Contains old (1716) secular material.
</cell><cell>
Also hat Gott die Welt geliebt.
</cell><cell>
Marianne von Ziegler <emph>(Ibid.).</emph> Emended   by Bach. See <q>Was mir behagt.</q>
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Salomo  Liscow's hymn, <q>Also hat Gott die Welt geliebt</q>;  St. John iii. 18; rest of libretto original. S. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;175
</cell><cell>
?1735. Whit Tuesday.
</cell><cell>
Er rufet seinen Schafen mit Namen (St. John x. 3).
</cell><cell>
Marianne  von Ziegler <emph>(Ibid.).</emph> Emended slightly by Bach.
</cell><cell>
St. John x. 3, 6; Stanza ix. of Johann Rist's hymn, <q>O Gottes Geist, mein Trost und Rath </q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
176
</cell><cell>
?1735. Trinity Sunday. [See No. 20 (1725).]
</cell><cell>
Es ist ein trotzig und verzagt  Ding. (Cf.  Jer. xvii. 9).
</cell><cell>
Marianne von Ziegler <emph>(Ibid.).</emph> Emended   by Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanza viii. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Was alle Weisheit in der Welt</q>;  rest original. S. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
107
</cell><cell>
c. 1735. Seventh S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Was willst du dich betr&uuml;ben.
</cell><cell>
Johann Heermann.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Six stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form.  The final Choral is stanza xiv. of David Denicke's hymn, <q>Ich will zu aller Stunde.</q> S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
94
</cell><cell>
?1735. Ninth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Was frag ich nach der Welt.
</cell><cell>
Georg Michael Pfefferkorn (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral  Cantata. Stanzas  i.,  iii.,  v.,  vii., viii. are set in their original form.    Stanzas ii., iv., vi. are paraphrased in the Arias.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
133
</cell><cell>
1735 (or 1737). Feast of St. John the Evangelist.
</cell><cell>
Ich freue mich in dir.
</cell><cell>
Caspar Ziegler (arranged by ?Christian Weiss, junr.).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and iv. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening stanzas are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>


<pb n="215" />

<row><cell>
100
</cell><cell>
c. 1735. ?Fifteenth S. after Trinity, for a Wedding.
</cell><cell>
Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan.
</cell><cell>
Samuel Rodigast.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata.   The six stanzas of the hymn are set in their original form.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
5
</cell><cell>
1735. Nineteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wo soll ich fliehen hin. 
</cell><cell>
Johann   Heermann    (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and xi. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening Arias and Recitativi are based particularly on stanzas iii., iv., vii., viii., ix.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
79
</cell><cell>
1735. Reformation Festival (Oct. 30).
</cell><cell>
Gott, der Herr, ist Sonn und Schild (Psalm Ixxxiv. 11).
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr.
</cell><cell>
Psalm lxxxiv. 11; Stanza i. of Martin Rinkart's hymn, <q>Nun danket alle Gott</q>; Stanza viii. of Ludwig Helmbold's hymn, <q>Nun lasst uns Gott dem Herren</q>; rest of libretto original. S. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
41
</cell><cell>
?1736. New Year's Day.
</cell><cell>
Jesu, nun sei gepreiset.
</cell><cell>
Johann Heermann (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and iii. of the hymn are set in their original form. Stanza ii. is paraphrased in the intervening Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;13
</cell><cell>
<emph>c.</emph> 1736. Second S. after the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Meine Seufzer, meine Thr&auml;nen.
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Stanza  ii. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>Zion klagt mit Angst und Schmerzen</q>; Stanza xv. of Paul Flemming's hymn, <q>In allen meinen Thaten</q>; rest original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
</cell><cell>
[1736. Easter Day]
</cell><cell>
Kommt, eilet und laufet.
</cell><cell>
?Picander.]
</cell><cell>
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
6
</cell><cell>
1736. Easter Monday.
</cell><cell>
Bleib' bei uns, denn es will Abend werdeu (St. Luke xxiv. 29).
</cell><cell>
Author unknown. Wustmann (note 53) suggests Picander.
</cell><cell>
St.  Luke xxiv. 29; Stanzas i. and ii. of Nikolaus Selnecker's hymn, <q>Ach bleib' bei uns, Herr Jesu Christ</q>; Stanza ii. of Luther's hymn, <q>Erhalt' uns, Herr, bei deinem Wort</q>; rest original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="216" />

<row><cell>
28
</cell><cell>
c.  1736. Sunday after  Christmas. Spitta, ii. 433, dates it 1725-27.
</cell><cell>
Gottlob! nun geht das Jahr zu Ende.
</cell><cell>
Erdmann Neumeister (<q>F&uuml;nffache Kirchen-Andachten,</q> 1716. Ser. IV.
</cell><cell>
Stanza  i.   of  Johann   Graumann's  hymn, <q>Nun lob', mein Seel', den Herren</q>; Jeremiah xxxii. 41; Stanza vi. of Paul Eber's  hymn, <q>Helft  mir  Gott's G&uuml;tte preisen</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
17
</cell><cell>
c. 1737. Fourteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wer Dank opfert, der preiset mich (Psalm 1., 23).
</cell><cell>
?Bach. Schweitzer (ii. 343) attributes the text to Picander.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Psalm 1. 23;  <emph>Part II.:</emph> St. Luke xvii. 15, 16; Stanza iii. of Johann Graumann's hymn, <q>Nun lob', mein' Seel', den Herren</q>; rest original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
118
</cell><cell>
c. 1737. ?For a Funeral.
</cell><cell>
O Jesu Christ, mein's Lebens Licht.
</cell><cell>
Martin Behm.
</cell><cell>
Stanza i. of Martin Behm's hymn, <q>O Jesu Christ, mein's Lebens Licht.</q> A Motet; <foreign lang="la">cf.</foreign> No. 50 (<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1740.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
197
</cell><cell>
?1737. For a Wedding. Contains older material (?1728).
</cell><cell>
Gott  ist  uns're Zuversicht.
</cell><cell>
?Bach. Pt. II.'s Arias are based on the Christmas Cantata <q>Ehre sei Gott</q> (?1728).
</cell><cell>
Stanza iii. of Luther's hymn, <q>Nun bitten wir den heiligen Geist</q>; Stanza vii. (partly rewritten) of Georg Neumark's hymn, <q>Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten</q>; rest original. S. A. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
30
</cell><cell>
1738. Feast of St. John Baptist (Midsummer Day).
</cell><cell>
Freue dich, erloste Schaar.
</cell><cell>
Reconstruction, by ?Picander, of his <q>Angenehmes Wiederau,</q> 1737, from  which the music also is in part borrowed.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Stanza iii. of Johannes Olearius' hymn, <q>Tr&ouml;stet, tr&ouml;stet, meine Lieben</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="217"/>

<row><cell>
123
</cell><cell>
1740. Feast of the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Liebster Immanuel, Herzog der Frommen.
</cell><cell>
Ahasuerus Fritsch (arranged by ?Christian Weiss, junr.).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and v. of the hymn are set in their original form. Stanzas ii., iii., iv. are paraphrased in the intervening Arias and Recitativi. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;32
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. First S. after the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Leibster Jesu, mein Verlangen.
</cell><cell>
?Picander.
</cell><cell>
St. Luke ii. 49; Stanza xii. of Paul Gerhardt's hymn, <q>Weg, mein Herz, mit den Gedanken</q>; rest of libretto original. S. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
124
</cell><cell>
c.  1740. First S. after the Epiph-any.
</cell><cell>
Meinen Jesum lass' ich nicht.
</cell><cell>
Christian   Keimann   (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and vi. of the hymn are set in their original form.  Stanzas ii.-v. are paraphrased in the intervening Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
3
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Second S. after the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Ach Gott, wie manches Herzeleid.
</cell><cell>
Martin Moller (arranged by ?Christian Weiss, junr.).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., ii., xii. of the hymn are set in their original form.  Stanzas iv.-vi., ix., x. are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativo.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
111
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Third S. after the Epiphany.
</cell><cell>
Was mein Gott will, das g'scheh' allzeit.
</cell><cell>
Albrecht, Margrave of Brandenburg-Culmbach (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and iv. of the hymn are set in their original form. Stanzas ii. and iii. are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
92
</cell><cell>
c.  1740. Septuagesima.
</cell><cell>
Ich hab' in Gottes Herz und Sinn.
</cell><cell>
Paul Gerhardt (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., ii., v., x., xii. of the hymn are set in their original form. Stanzas iii., iv., vi.-viii., ix. are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativo.
</cell></row>

<pb n="218" />

<row><cell>
125
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c. </foreign>1740. Feast of the Purification.
</cell><cell>
Mit Fried' und Freud' ich fahr' dahin.
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata.  Stanzas i., ii. , iv. are set in their original form.  Stanza iii. is paraphrased in the second Aria and Recitative. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
126
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c. </foreign>1740. Sexagesima.
</cell><cell>
Erhalt' uns, Heir, bei deinem Wort.
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata.   Stanzas i., iii., and Luther's <q>Verleih' uns Frieden gn&auml;diglich</q> are set in their original form. The other stanzas are paraphrased in the Arias and second Recit. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
127
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c. </foreign> 1740. Quinquagesima (<q>Esto-mihi</q>).
</cell><cell>
Herr Jesu Christ, wahr'r Mensch und Gott.
</cell><cell>
Paul Eber  (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata.  Stanzas i. and viii. of the hymn are set in their original form.  The intervening stanzas are paraphrased in the Recitativi and Arias. S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
1
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c. </foreign> 1740. Feast of the Annunciation.
</cell><cell>
Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern.
</cell><cell>
Philipp Nicolai (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata.  Stanzas i. and vii. of the hymn are set in their original form.  Stanzas ii.-vi. are paraphrased in the intervening Recitativi and Arias.  S. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
146
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c. </foreign> 1740. Third S. after Easter (<q>Jubilate</q>).
Incorporates older instrumental material.
</cell><cell>
Wir m&uuml;ssen durch  viel Tr&uuml;bsal in das Reich Gottes eingehen (Acts xiv. 22).
</cell><cell>
Author unknown. Schweitzer (ii. 343) names Picander.
</cell><cell>
Acts xiv. 22; excepting the concluding Choral (words wanting in the score) the rest of the libretto is original.
</cell></row>

<pb n="219" />

<row><cell>
34
</cell><cell>
c. 1740 (or  1741). WhitSunday(<q>AmPfingst-feste</q>. Incorporates (modified) parts of  the Wedding Cantata (c. 1730) bearing the same title
</cell><cell>
O ewiges Feuer, O Ursprung der Liebe.
</cell><cell>
?by Bach.
</cell><cell>
Original throughout. Movements 1, 3, 5, follow the Wedding Cantata, words and music. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
2
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Second S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ach Gott, vom Himmel sieh darein.
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and vi. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening stanzas are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
135
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Third S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ach Herr, mich armen Sunder.
</cell><cell>
Cyriacus Schneegass. Also attributed to Christoph Demantius (arranged by ?Christian Weiss, junr.).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and vi. of the hymn (see Psalm vi.) are set in their original form.  The intervening stanzas are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
7
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign>1740. Feast of St. John Baptist (Midsummer Day).
</cell><cell>
Christ  unser  Herr zum Jordan kam.
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and vii. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening stanzas are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
10
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Feast of the  Visitation.
</cell><cell>
Meine Seel' erhebt den Herren. (St. Luke, i. 46).
</cell><cell>
St. Luke, i. 46-55 (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Verses 46-48, 54, and the Doxology, are set in their original form. The other verses are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativi.
</cell></row>

<pb n="220" />

<row><cell>
45
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Eighth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Est ist dir gesagt, Mensch, was gut ist (Micah vi., 8).
</cell><cell>
?Christian   Weiss,   senr. Schweitzer (ii. 343) attributes the text to Picander.
</cell><cell>
<emph>Part I.:</emph> Micah vi. 8; <emph>Part II.:</emph> St. Matthew vii. 22, 23;   Stanza ii. of Johann Heermann's hymn, <q>O Gott, du frommer Gott</q>; rest original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
178
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Eighth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wo Gott der Herr nicht bei uns halt (Psalm cxxiv.).
</cell><cell>
Justus Jonas (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., ii., iv., v., vii., viii., of the hymn are set in their original form.  The other stanzas are paraphrased. A. T. B. Soli.                                                                   
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
101
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Tenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Nimm von uns, Herr, du treuer Gott.
</cell><cell>
Martin Moller (arranged). Schweitzer (ii. 375) names Picander.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata.    Stanzas i., iii., v., vii. are  set in their original form. Stanzas ii., iv., vi. are paraphrased in the Arias.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
113
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Eleventh S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Heir Jesu Christ, du h&ouml;chstes Gut.
</cell><cell>
Bartholoma&uuml;ws Ringwaldt(arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., ii., iv., viii. of the
hymn are set in their original form. Stanzas iii., v.-vii. are paraphrased in the Arias and Recitativo.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
193
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Inauguration of the Town Council (c. August 24). Incomplete.
</cell><cell>
Ihr Pforten [Tore] zu Zion
</cell><cell>
Author unknown.
</cell><cell>
Original throughout. S. A. T. (or B.) Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
33
</cell><cell>
c. 1740.  Thirteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Allein zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ.
</cell><cell>
Johannes Schneesing.  Attributed also to Conrad Hubert. Arranged.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and iv. of the hymn are set in their original form.    The intervening stanzas  are paraphrased. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="221" />

<row><cell>
78
</cell><cell>
c. 1740 (or after 1734) Fourteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Jesu, der du meine Seele.
</cell><cell>
Johann Rist (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and xii. of the hymn are set in their original form. Four lines of Stanza x. are inserted into the last Recitativo.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
138
</cell><cell>
c. 1740 (or earlier). Fifteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Warum betr&uuml;bst du dich, mein Herz.
</cell><cell>
?Hans Sachs and ?Picander.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., ii., iii. of the hymn are set in their original form.  Rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
114
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Seventeenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ach, lieben Christen, seid getrost.
</cell><cell>
Johannes Gigas (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., iii., vi. of the hymn are set in their original form. The other stanzas are paraphrased in the remaining movements.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
96
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Eighteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Herr  Christ, der ein'ge Gottes-Sohn.
</cell><cell>
Elisabethe Cruciger (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and v. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening stanzas are paraphrased in the Recitativi and Arias.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
130
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Feast of St. Michael the Archangel.
</cell><cell>
Herr Gott, dich loben alle wir.
</cell><cell>
Paul Eber (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., xi., xii. (in score only) of the hymn are set in their original form. The remaining stanzas are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
50
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Feast of St. Michael the Archangel.
</cell><cell>
Nun ist das Heil und die Kraft.
</cell><cell>
Revelation xii 10.
</cell><cell>
Rev. xii. 10; a single Bible passage. A Motet. <foreign lang="la">Cf.</foreign> No. 118 (c. 1737).
</cell></row>

<pb n="222" />

<row><cell>
48
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign>1740. Nineteenth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ich elender Mensch, wer wird mich erlosen (Rom. vii. 24).
</cell><cell>
?Picander.
</cell><cell>
Romans vii. 24; Stanza iv. of the anonymous hymn, <q>Ach Gott und Herr</q>; Stanza xii. of the anonymous hymn, <q>Herr Jesu Christ, ich schrei zu dir</q>; rest original. A. T. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
180
</cell><cell>
c. 1740.  Twentieth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Schmucke dich, O liebe Seele.
</cell><cell>
Johann Franck (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., iv., ix. of the hymn are set in their original form. The remaining stanzas are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
38
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Twenty-first S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Aus tiefer Noth schrei ich zu dir (Psalm cxxx.).
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged by ?Christian Weiss, junr.).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and v. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening stanzas are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
115
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Twenty-second S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Mache dich, mein Geist, bereit.
</cell><cell>
Johann Burchard Freystein (arranged by ?Picander.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and x. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening ones are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
139
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Twenty-third S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Wohl dem, der sich auf seinen Gott.
</cell><cell>
Johann Christoph Rube (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and v. are set in their original form. The intervening ones are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
26
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1740. Twenty-fourth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Ach wie fluchtig.
</cell><cell>
Michael Franck (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and xiii. of the hymn are set in their original form. Stanzas ii.-xii. are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

<pb n="223" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;90
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Twenty-fifth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Es reifet euch ein sohrecklich Ende.
</cell><cell>
?Picander.
</cell><cell>
Stanza vii. of Martin Holler's hymn, <q>Nimm von uns, Herr, du treuer Gott</q>; rest of libretto original. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
62
</cell><cell>
c. 1740 (after 1734). First S. in Advent.
</cell><cell>
Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland.
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and viii. are set in their original form. The intervening stanzas are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
91
</cell><cell>
c. 1740.   Christmas Day.
</cell><cell>
Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ.
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., ii., vii. of the hymn are set in their original form. The remaining stanzas are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
110
</cell><cell>
Unser Mund sei voll Lachens (Psalm cxxvi. 2).
</cell><cell>
After 1734. Christmas Day. Has older instrumental material.
</cell><cell>
?Christian Weiss, senr. Schweitzer (ii. 343) suggests Picander.
</cell><cell>
Psalm cxxvi. 2, 3; Jeremiah x. 6; St. Luke ii. 14; Stanza v. of Caspar Fuger's hymn, <q>Wir Christenleut'</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
&dagger;57
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Feast of St. Stephen.
</cell><cell>
Selig ist der Mann (St. James i. 12).
</cell><cell>
?Picander.
</cell><cell>
St. James i. 12; Stanza vi. of Ahasuerus Fritsch's hymn, <q>Hast du, denn, Jesu, dein Angesicht gantzlich verborgen</q>; rest of libretto original. S. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
121
</cell><cell>
c. 1740. Feast of St. Stephen.
</cell><cell>
Christum wir sollen loben schon.
</cell><cell>
Luther (arranged by ?Picander).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and viii. of the hymn are set in their original form. Stanzas ii.-vi. are paraphrased. A. T. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<pb n="224" />

<row><cell>
&dagger;l51
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1740. Feast of St. John the Evangelist.
</cell><cell>
S&uuml;sser Trost, main Jesus kommt.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanza viii. of Nikolaus  Herman's hymn, <q>Lobt Gott, ihr Christen alle gleich</q>; rest of libretto original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
Incomplete
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1740 (after 1734). For a Wedding.
</cell><cell>
Herr  Gott,  Beherrseher aller Dinge.
</cell><cell>
?Bach.
</cell><cell>
Stanzas iv.  and v. of Joachim Neander's hymn, <q>Lobe den Herren</q>; rest original. S. B. Soli.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
122
</cell><cell>
<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1742. Sunday after Christmas Day.
</cell><cell>
Das neugebor'ne Kindelein.
</cell><cell>
Cyriacus Schneegass and ?Bach.
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i., iii., iv. of the hymn are set in their original form.  Stanza ii. is paraphrased in the first Aria. The two Recitativi are original.
</cell></row>

<row><cell>
116
</cell><cell>
1744 (Nov. 15). Twenty-fifth S. after Trinity.
</cell><cell>
Du Friedef&uuml;rst, Herr Jesu Christ.
</cell><cell>
Jakob Ebert. Also attributed to Ludwig Helmbold (arranged).
</cell><cell>
Choral Cantata. Stanzas i. and vii. of the hymn are set in their original form. The intervening stanzas are paraphrased.
</cell></row>

</table>
</div>


</div>

<pb n="143" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>APPENDIX III.  THE BACHGESELLSCHAFT EDITIONS OF BACH'S WORKS</head>
<p>
The Bachgesellschaft was founded on December 15, 1850, issued its first volume in 1851, and was dissolved on January 27, 1900, upon the publication of its sixtieth and concluding volume.  The Society had fulfilled its fundamental purpose&mdash;the publication of Bach's works&mdash;and on the very date of its dissolution the Neue Bachgesellschaft was founded with the object of popularising Bach's music by publishing it in practicable form and by holding Bach Festivals.  A secondary object, the foundation of a Bach Museum at Eisenach, in the house in which Bach was born, already has been achieved.  Bach Festivals have been held at regular intervals&mdash;at Berlin in 1901, Leipzig in 1904, Eisenach&mdash;in connection with the opening of the Museum&mdash;in 1907, at Chemnitz in 1908, Duisburg in 1910, Breslau in 1912, Vienna in 1914.  The publications of the new Society necessarily are unimportant by the side of those of its predecessor.  It has, however, brought to light and published a Cantata overlooked by the old Bachgesellschaft.  (See New B.G. XIII. (2).)
</p>
<p>
The publications of both Societies are quoted here by their year of issue&mdash;I., II., III., and so forth.  When more than one volume has been published in a single year they are differentiated thus: XV.(1), XV.(2).  When a volume appeared upon a date subsequent to the Vereinsjahr it
<pb n="226" />
bears, the date of the Preface is indicated in a bracket, e.g. 1872[1876].
</p>
<p>
The editorial work of the original Bachgesellschaft was undertaken, in unequal proportions, by ten editors during fifty years.  Of the Society's sixty volumes three were edited by Moritz Hauptmann (1851-58), one by Carl F. Becker (1853), two by Julius Rietz (1854-56), twenty-seven by Wilhelm Rust (1855-81), one by Franz Kroll (1866), eleven by Alfred D&ouml;rffel (1876-98), six by Paul Graf Waldersee (1881-94), five by Ernst Naumann (1886-94), two by Franz W&uuml;llner (1887-92), and two by Hermann Kretzschmar (1895-1900).
</p>

<div>
<head type="sub">(A) PUBLICATIONS OF THE BACHGESELLSCHAFT</head>

<list>
<item n="I."> 1851. Kirchencantaten. Erster Band. Ed. Moritz 
Hauptmann.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Church Cantatas are published by Peters and also by Breitkopf and Haertel.  A prefixed asterisk indicates that an English edition of the Cantata or Oratorio is published by Novello or Breitkopf and Haertel.
</p>
<p>
The Organ music is published by Novello, to whose edition references are given (N.), Peters, and Breitkopf and Haertel.   collation of the Peters and Novello editions is given in Appendix V.
</p>
<p>
The Clavier and Instrumental music is published by Peters, to whose edition references are given (P.).
</p>
</note>

<list>
<item>No. *1. Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern.</item>
<item>No. *2. Ach Gott, vom Himmel sieh darein.</item>
<item>No. *3. Ach Gott, wie manches Herzeleid (c. 1740).</item>
<item>No. *4. Christ lag in Todesbanden.</item>
<item>No.  5. Wo soll ich fliehen hin.</item>
<item>No. *6. Bleib' bei uns, denn es will Abend werden.</item>
<item>No.  7. Christ unser Herr zura Jordan kam.</item>
<item>No. *8. Liebster Gott, warm werd' ich sterben?</item>
<item>No.  9. Es ist das Heil uns kommen her.</item>
<item>No. *10. Meine Seel' erhebt den Herren!</item>
<item>Frontispiece: G. Haussmann's portrait of Bach, in the 
possession of St. Thomas' School, Leipzig.</item>
</list>
</item>

<pb n="227" />
<item n="II.">1852. Kirchencantaten. Zweiter Band. Ed. Moritz Hauptmann.
<list>
<item>*No. 11. Lobet Gott in seinen Reichen.</item>
<item>No. *12. Weinen, Klagen, Sorgen, Zagen.</item>
<item>No. 13. Meine Seufzer, meine Thr&auml;nen.</item>
<item>No. 14. War' Gott nicht mit uns diese Zeit.</item>
<item>No. 15. Denn du wirst meine Seele nicht in der H&ouml;lle lassen.</item>
<item>No. 16. Herr Gott dich loben wir.</item>
<item>No. 17. Wer Dank opfert, der preiset mich.</item>
<item>No. 18. Gleich vie der Begen uud Schnee vom Himmel fallt.</item>
<item>No. 19. Es erhub sich ein Streit.</item>
<item>No. 20. O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort (<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1725).</item>
</list>
</item>

<item n="III.">1853. Clavierwerke. Erster Band. Ed. Carl F. Becker.
<list>
<item n="(1)">Fifteen Inventions and Fifteen Symphonies (Sinfonie) (P. bk. 201).<note place="foot">
<p>
A Variant of the first Invention is on p. 342 of the volume.  A Variant of Sinfonia ix. is on p. vi. of the Nachtrag.
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item n="(2)"> Clavier&uuml;bung, Part I.:&mdash;
  <list>
  <item>Partiten 1-6 (P. bka. 205, 206).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="(3)"> Clavier&uuml;bung, Part II.:&mdash;
  <list>
  <item>Concerto, in F major, in the Italian style (P bk. 207).</item>
  <item>Partita (Overture) in B minor (P. bk. 208).</item>
  </list>
</item>
 
<item n="(4)"> Clavier&uuml;bung, Part III.:&mdash;
  <list>
  <item>Organ Prelude and Fugue in E flat major (N. bk. 16 pp. 19, 83).</item>
  <item>Four Duetti (P. bk. 208 p. 78).</item>
  <item>Catechism Choral Preludes (Organ):&mdash;
    <list>
      <item n="1.">
        <list>
        <item>Kyrie, Gott Vater in Ewigkeit (N. bk. 16 p. 28).</item> 
        <item>Christe, aller Welt Trost (ib. p. 30).</item>
        <item>Kyrie, Gott heiliger Geist (ib. p. 33).</item>
        </list>
      </item>
      <item n="2.">
       <list>
        <item>Kyrie, Gott Vater in Ewigkeit (alio modo) (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> p. 36).</item>
        <item>Christe, aller Welt Trost (ib. p. 37).</item>
        <item>Kyrie, Gott heiliger Geist (ib. p. 38).</item>
       </list>
	  </item>
      <item n="3."> Allein Gott in der Hoh' sei Ehr' (ib. p. 39).</item>
      <item n="4."> Ditto (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> p. 40*).<note place="foot">
           <p>
           A Variant is in B.G. XI.
          </p>
          </note></item>
<pb n="228" />
      <item n="5."> Allein Gott in der Hoh' sei Ehr' (Fughetta) (N. bk. 16 p. 41).</item>
      <item n="6."> Dies sind die heil'gen zehn Gebot' (ib. p. 42).</item>
      <item n="7."> Ditto (Fughetta) (ib. p. 47).</item>
      <item n="8."> Wir glauben all' an einen Gott (ib. p. 49).</item>
      <item n="9."> Ditto (Fughetta) (ib. p. 52).</item>
      <item n="10."> Vater unser im Himmelreich (ib. p. 53).</item>
      <item n="11."> Ditto (ib. p. 61).<note place="foot">
         <p>
         A Variant is in P. bk. 244 p. 109.
         </p>
         </note></item>
      <item n="12."> Christ unser Herr zum Jordan kam (ib. p. 62).</item>
      <item n="13."> Ditto (ib. p. 67).</item>
      <item n="14."> Aus tiefer Noth schrei ich zu dir (ib. p. 68).</item>
      <item n="15."> Ditto (ib. p. 72).</item>
      <item n="16."> Jesus Christus unser Heiland (ib. p. 74).</item>
      <item n="17."> Ditto (Fugue) (ib. p. 80).</item>
     </list>
	 </item>
    </list>
	</item>

<item n="(5)"> Clavier&uuml;bung, Part IV.:&mdash;
  <list>
   <item>Aria and thirty Variations (Goldberg) (P. bk. 209).</item>
</list>
</item>

<item n="(6)">
  <list>
    <item>Toccata in F sharp minor (P. bk. 210 p. 30).</item>
    <item>Ditto. C minor (P. bk. 210 p. 40).</item>
    <item>Fugue (with Fantasia) in A minor (P. bk. 207 p. 16).</item>
  </list>
 </item>
 </list>
 </item>

<item n="IV.">1854. *Passionsmusik nach dem Evangelisten Matth&auml;us.  Ed. Julius Rietz.</item>

<item n="V(1).">1855. Kirchencantaten. Dritter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
   <list>
    <item>*21. Ich hatte viel Bek&uuml;mmerniss.</item>
    <item>22. Jesus nahm zu sich die Zw&ouml;lfe.</item>
    <item>*23. Du wahrer Gott und Davids Sohn.</item>
    <item>24. Ein ungef&auml;rbt Gem&uuml;the.</item>
    <item>*25. Es ist nichts Gesundes an meinem Leibe.</item>
    <item>26. Ach wie fl&uuml;chtig, ach wie nichtig.</item>
    <item>*27. Wer weiss, wie nahe mir mein Ende.</item>
    <item>*28. Gottlob! nun geht das Jahr zu Ende.</item>
    <item>29. Wir danken dir, Gott, wir danken dir.</item>
    <item>*30. Freue dich, erl&ouml;ste Schaar.</item>
   </list>
</item>


<item n="V(2).">1855 [1856]. Weinachts-Oratorium. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.</item>

<item n="VI.">1856. *Messe. H moll. Ed. Julius Rietz.</item>

<item n="VI.">VII. 1857. Kirchencantaten. Vierter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
  <list>
   <item>No. 31. Der Himmel lacht, die Erde jubiliret.</item>
   <item>*32. Liebster Jesu, mein Verlangen.</item> 
   <item>33. Allein zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ.</item> 
   <item>*34. O ewiges Feuer, O Ursprung der Liebe.</item> 
   <item>35. Geist und Seele wird verwirrt.</item>
   <item>36. Schwingt freudig euch empor.</item>
   <item>37. Wer da glaubet und getauft wird.</item>
   <item>*38. Aus tiefer Noth schrei ich zu dir.</item>
   <item>*39. Brich dem Hungrigen dein Brod.</item>
   <item>*40. Dazu ist erschienen der Sohn Gottes.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="VIII."> 1858. Vier Messen. F dur, *A dur, G moll, G dur. Ed. Moritz Hauptmann.</item>

<item n="IX."> 1859 [I860]. Kammermusik. Erster Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
   <list>
    <item>Three Sonatas, in B minor, E flat major, A minor (and Variant), for Clavier and Flute (P. bk. 234).</item>
    <item>Suite in A major, for Clavier and Violin (P. bk. 236).</item>
    <item>Six Sonatas, in B minor, A major, E major, C minor, F minor (and Variant), G major (and Variants), for Clavier and Violin (P. bks. 232, 233).</item>
    <item>Three Sonatas, in G major (or 2 Flutes), D major, G minor for Clavier and Viola da Gamba (P. bk. 239).</item>
    <item>Sonata in G major, for Flute, Violin, and Clavier (P. bk. 237).</item>
    <item>Sonata in C major, for two Violins and Clavier (P. bk. 237).</item>
    <item>Sonata in G minor, for Clavier and Violin (not in P.).<note place="foot">
<p>
<q>If genuine, the Sonata is a youthful work,</q> remarks Schweitzer, i. 401 n.
</p>
</note>
</item>
   </list>
</item>

<item n="X.">1860. Kirchencantaten. F&uuml;nfter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
   <list>
     <item>No. *41. Jesu, nun sei gepreiset.</item>
     <item>42. Am Abend aber desselbigen Sabbaths.</item>
     <item>*43. Gott fahret auf mit Jauchzen.</item>
     <item>*44. Sie werden euch in den Bann thun (<foreign lang="la">c.</foreign> 1725).</item>
     <item>45. Es ist dir gesagt, Mensch, was gut ist.</item>
     <item>46. Schauet doch und sehet, etc.</item>
     <item>47. Wer sich selbst erh&ouml;het, der soll emiedriget werden</item>
     <item>48. Ich elender Mensch, wer wird mich erl&ouml;sen?</item>
     <item>49. Ich geh' und suche mit Verlangen.</item>
     <item>*50. Nun ist das Heil und die Kraft.</item>
   </list>
</item>

<item n="XI (1).">1861 [1862]. *Magnificat, D dur, und vier Sanctus, C dur, D dur, D moll, G dur. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
  <list>
    <item>The Appendix contains four additional numbers which are found in one of the two Autograph scores of the Magnificat.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XI (2)."> 1861 [1862]. Kammermusik f&uuml;r Gesang. Erster Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
   <list>
    <item>Secular Cantata: *Phoebus und Pan.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Weichet nur, betr&uuml;bte Schatten.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Amore traditore.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Von der Vergn&uuml;gsamkeit, or, Ich bin in mir vergn&uuml;gt.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Der zufriedengestellte Aeolus, or, Zer reisset, zersprenget, zertr&uuml;mmert die Gruft.</item>
    </list>
</item>

<item n="XII (1).">1862 [1863]. *Passionsmusik nach dem Evangelisten Johannes. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.</item>

<item n="XII (2).">1862 [1863]. Kirchencantaten. Sechster Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
   <list>
    <item>No. 51. Jauchzet Gott in allen Landen.</item>
    <item>52. Falsche Welt, dir trau ich nicht.</item>
    <item>*53. Schlage doch, gew&uuml;nschte Stunde.</item>  
    <item>*54. Widerstehe doch der S&uuml;nde.</item>
    <item>55. Ich armer Mensch, ich S&uuml;ndenknecht.</item>
    <item>*56. Ich will den Kreuzstab gerne tragen.</item>
    <item>57. Selig ist der Mann.</item>
    <item>58. Ach Gott, wie manches Herzeleid (1733).</item>
    <item>59. Wer mich liebet, der wird mein Wort halten (1716).</item>
    <item>60. O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort (1732).</item>
   </list>
</item>


<item n="XIII (1).">1863 [1864]. Trauungs-Cantaten. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
   <list>
     <item>No. *195. Dem Gerechten muss das Licht.</item>
     <item>196. Der Herr denket an uns.</item>
     <item>197.
       <list>
        <item>Gott ist uns're Zuversicht.</item>
        <item>Drei Chorale zu Trauungen : (1) Was Gott thut, (2) Sei Lob und Ehr', (3) Nun danket alle Gott.</item>
       </list></item>
    </list>
</item>
 
<item n="XIII (2)."> 1863. Clavierwerke. Zweiter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
   <list>
     <item>Six Great Suites, in A major, A minor, G minor, F major, E minor, D minor, known as the <q>English Suites</q> (P. bks. 203,204).</item>
     <item>Six Small Suites, in D minor, C minor, B minor, E flat major, G major, E major, known as the <q>French Suites</q> (P. bk. 202).<note place="foot">
<p>
Additional movements of the second, third, and fourth Suites are in Appendix II. of B.G. XXXVI.
</p>
</note></item>
   </list>
</item>

<item n="XIII (3)."> 1863 [1865]. *Trauer-Ode. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
</item>

<item n="XIV."> 1864 [1866]. Clavierwerke. Dritter Band. Das wohltemperirte Clavier (P. bks. 2790 a-b.). Ed. Franz Kroll.<note place="foot">
<p>
The volume contains an Appendix of Variants, etc. See also B.G. XLV. (1) Appendix. Variants of Nos. 1, 3, 6 of Part II. are in Appendix I. of B.G. XXXVI.
</p>
</note>
<list>
  <item>Erster Theil, 1722.</item>
  <item>Zweiter Theil, 1744.</item>
</list>
</item>

<item n="XV."> 1865 [1867]. Orgelwerke. Erster Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
  <list>
    <item>Six Sonatas, in E flat major, C minor, D minor, E minor, 
C major, G major (N. bks. 4, 5), for 2 Claviers and Pedal.</item>
    <item>Eighteen Preludes and Fugues:&mdash;
     <list>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue in C major (N. bk. 7 p. 74).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue in D major (N. bk. 6 p. 10).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue in E minor (N. bk. 2 p. 44).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue in F minor (N. bk. 6 p. 21).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue in G minor (N. bk. 8 p. 120).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue in A major (N. bk. 3 p. 64).</item>
       <item>Prelude (Fantasia) and Fugue in C minor (N. bk. 3 p. 76).</item>
       <item>Prelude (Toccata) in D minor (N. bk. 10 p. 196).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue in D minor (N. bk. 9 p. 150).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue (Toccata) in F major (N. bk. 9 p. 176).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue the Great, in G major (N. bk. 8 p. 112).</item>
       <item>Prelude (Fantasia) and Fugue in G minor (N. bk. 8 p. 127).<note place="foot">
              <p>
              See publications of the N.B.G. xiv. (2) no. 5.
              </p>
              </note></item>
       <item>Prelude (Fantasia) and Fugue in A minor (N. bk. 7 p. 42).<note place="foot">
              <p>
              See publications of the N.B.G. vii. (3) no. 3.
              </p>
              </note></item>
       <item>Prelude (Fantasia) and Fugue in B minor (N. bk. 7 p. 52).</item>
       <item>Prelude (Fantasia) and Fugue in C minor (N. bk. 7 p. 64).</item>
       <item>Prelude (Fantasia) and Fugue in C major (N. bk. 9 p. 156).</item>
       <item>Prelude (Fantasia) and Fugue in E minor (N. bk. 8 p. 98).</item>
       <item>Prelude and Fugue in C major (N. bk. 3 p. 70).</item>
</list>
</item>
<item>
<list>
  <item>Three Toccatas and Fugues, in C major, the <q>Great</q> (N. bk. 9 p. 137).</item>
  <item>Toccata and Fugue D minor (N. bk. 6 p. 2).</item>
  <item>Toccata and Fugue E major (N. bk. 8 p. 88, as Prelude and Fugue in C major)</item>
</list>
</item>
<item>Passacaglia, in C minor (N. bk. 10 p. 214).</item>
</list>
</item>


<item n="XVI."> 1866 [1868]. Kirchencantaten. Siebenter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
 <list>
   <item>No. *61. Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland (1714).</item>
   <item>62. Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland (c. 1740).</item>
   <item>63. Christen, &auml;tzet diesen Tag.</item>
   <item>64. Sehet, welch' eine Liebe.</item>
   <item>*65. Sie werden aus Saba Alle kommen.</item>
   <item>66. Erfreut euch, ihr Herzen.</item>
   <item>*67. Halt' im Gedachtniss Jesum Christ.</item>
   <item>*68. Also hat Gott die Welt geliebt.</item>
   <item>69. Lobe den Herren, meine Seele.</item>
   <item>*70. Wachet, betet, seid bereit allezeit.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XVII."> 1867 [1869]. Kammermusik. Zweiter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
  <list>
   <item>Seven Concertos, in D minor (and Variant),<note place="foot">
      <p>
      For this work, in its original form as a Violin Concerto, see N.B.G. XVIII. (1 and     2).
      </p>
     </note>
 E major (and Variant), D major (and Variant), A major (and Variant), F minor, F major, G minor, for Clavier and Orchestra (Strings; two flutes added in Concerto VI. (P. bks. 248-254).<note place="foot">
     <p>
     The D major (No. 3) and G minor (No. 7) Concertos are identical with the Violin Concertos in E major and A minor. See B.G. XXI. (1). No. 6 (F. major) is the fourth Brandenburg Concerto (in G.). See B.G. XIX. no. 4.
     </p>
      </note>
</item>
   <item>Triple Concerto in A minor, for Flute, Violin, Clavier, and Orchestra (Strings). (P. bk. 255).</item>
</list>
</item>

<item n="XVIII."> 1868 [1870]. Kirchencantaten. Achter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
  <list>
    <item>No. 71. Gott ist mem K&uuml;onig.</item>
    <item>72. Alles nur nach Gottes Willen.</item>
    <item>73. Herr, wie du willt, so schick's mit mir.</item>
    <item>74. Wer mich liebet, der wird mein Wort halten (? 1735).</item>
    <item>75. Die Elenden sollen essen.</item>
    <item>76. Die Himmel erzahlen die Ehre Gottes.</item>
    <item>77. Du sollst Gott, deinen Herren, lieben.</item>
    <item>78. Jesu, der du meine Seele.</item>
    <item>*79. Gott, der Herr, ist Sonn' und Schild.</item>
    <item>*80. Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott.</item>
</list>
</item>

<item n="XIX."> 1869 [1871]. Kammermusik. Dritter Band. Ed. 
Wilhelm Rust.
<p>
Six Concertos (<q>Brandenburg</q>) for Orchestra and Continuo:&mdash;
</p>
   <list>
    <item>No. I. in F major (Strings, 3 Ob., Fag., 2 Cor. (P. bk. 261).<note place="foot">
          <p>
          In a shortened form this work appears also as a Sinfonia in F major. See B.G. XXXI. (1) no. 5, and N.B.G. X. (2).
          </p>
          </note></item>

    <item>No. II. in F major (Strings, Flute, Oboe, Tromba) (P. bk. 262).</item>
    <item>No. III. in G major (Strings) (P. bk. 263). [N.B.G. IX. (3)]. </item>
    <item>No. IV. in G major (Strings and 2 Flutes) (P. bk. 264). </item>
    <item>No. V. in D major (Strings, Flute, Clavier) (P. bk. 265). </item>
    <item>No. VI. in B flat major (2 Violas, 2 Violas da Gamba, Violoncello, Contrabasso) (P. bk. 266).</item>
</list>
</item>

<item n="XX (1)."> 1870 [1872]. Kirchencantaten. Neunter Band. Ed. 
Wilhelm Rust. 
  <list>
   <item>No. *81. Jesus schl&auml;ft, was soll ich hoffen?</item>
   <item>*82. Ich habe genug.</item>
   <item>83. Erf route Zeit im neuen Bunde.</item>
   <item>84. Ich bin vergn&uuml;gt mit meinem Gl&uuml;cke.</item>
   <item>85. Ich bin ein guter Hirt. [Score, N.B.G. IX. (1)].</item>
   <item>86. Wahrlich, wahrlich, ich sage euch.</item>
   <item>87. Bisher habt ihr nichts gebeten in meinem Namen.</item>
   <item>88. Siehe, ich will viel Fischer aussenden. [Score, N.B.G. VII. (1)].</item>
   <item>89. Was soll ich aus dir machen, Ephraim?</item>
   <item>90. Es reifet euch ein schrecklich Ende.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XX (2)."> 1870 [1873]. Kammermusik f&uuml;r Gesang. Zweiter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
 <list>
   <item>Secular Cantata: Schleicht, spielende Wellen.</item>
   <item>Secular Cantata: Vereinigte Zwietracht der wechsehiden Saiten. </item>
   <item>Secular Cantata: Auf, schmetternde Tone der muntern Trompeten. [See B.G. XXXIV].</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XXI (1)."> 1871 [1874]. Kammermusik. Vierter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
  <list>
  <item>Three Concertos for Violin and Orchestra (Strings):&mdash;
    <list>
      <item>No. I. in A minor (P. bk. 229).<note place="foot">
         <p>
         Identical with the G minor Clavier Concerto. See B.G. XVII. no. 7, and also B.G. XLV. (1), Appendix, p. 233.
         </p>
      </note>
      </item>
      <item>No. II. in E major (P. bk. 230).<note place="foot">
        <p>
        Identical with the D major Clavier Concerto. See B.G. XVII. no. 3, and N.B.G. VIII. (1)
        </p>
        </note>
      </item>
      <item>No. III. in D minor (two Violins) (P. bk. 231).<note place="foot">
            <p>
            Identical with the Concerto for two Claviers in C minor. See B.G. XXI. (2) no. 3.
            </p>
            </note>
      </item>
	  </list>
	  </item>
      <item> Symphonic movement, in D major, for Violin and Orchestra (Strings, 2 Ob., 3 Trombe, Timp.).<note place="foot">
       <p>
       The movement is described as being from <q>einer unbekannten Kirchencantate</q> for four voices and Orchestra. The Autograph is incomplete. The movement is not published elsewhere than in the B.G. edition.
       </p>
       </note>
      </item>
 </list>
</item>


<item n="XXI (2)."> 1871 [1874]. Kammermusik. F&uuml;nfter Band. Ed. 
Wilhelm Rust. 
 <list>
  <item>Three Concertos for two Claviers and Orchestra (Strings):&mdash;</item>
  <item>No. I. in C minor (P. bk. 257). </item>
  <item>No. II. in C major (P. bk. 256). </item>
  <item>No. III. in C minor (P. bk. 257b).<note place="foot">
        <p>
         Identical with the Concerto for 2 Violins, in D minor. See B.G. XXI. (1) no. 3. Also pp. 131, 158, 160, <foreign lang="la">supra.</foreign>
        </p>
        </note>
   </item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XXI (3)."> 1871 [1874]. *0ster-0ratorium: <q>Kommt, eilet und laufet.</q> Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
</item>

<item n="XXII."> 1872 [1875]. Kirchencantaten. Zehnter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
  <list>
    <item>No. 91. Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ.</item>
    <item>92. Ich hab' in Gottes Herz und Sinn.</item>
    <item>*93. Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten.</item>
    <item>94. Was frag ich nach der Welt.</item>
    <item>95. Christus, der ist mein Leben.</item>
    <item>96. Herr Christ, der ein'ge Gottes-Sohn.</item>
    <item>97. In allen meinen Thaten.</item>
    <item>98. Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan, in B major (c. 1732).</item>
    <item>99. Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan, in G major (c. 1733).</item>
    <item>100. Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan, in G major (c. 1735).</item>
  </list>
</item>


<item n="XXIII."> 1873 [1876]. Kirchencantaten. Elfter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
 <list>
  <item>No. 101. Nimm von uns, Herr, du treuer Gott.</item>
  <item>102. Herr, deine Augen sehen nach dem Glauben.</item>
  <item>103. Ihr werdet weinen und heulen.</item>
  <item>*104. Du Hirte Israel, h&ouml;re.</item>
  <item>105. Herr, gehe nicht in's Gericht.</item>
  <item>*106. Gottes Zeit ist die allerbeste Zeit (Actus tragicus).</item>
  <item>107. Was willst du dich betr&uuml;ben.</item>
  <item>108. Es ist euch gut, dass ich hingehe.</item>
  <item>109. Ich glaube, lieber Herre.</item>
  <item>110. Unser Mund sei voll Lachens.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XXIV."> 1874 [1876]. Kirchencantaten. Zw&ouml;lfter Band. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;rffel.
 <list>
  <item>No. 111. Was mein Gott will, das g'scheh' allzeit.</item>
  <item>*112. Der Herr ist mein getreuer Hirt.</item>
  <item>113. Herr Jesu Christ, du h&ouml;chstes Gut.</item>
  <item>114. Ach, lieben Christen, seid getrost.</item>
  <item>*115. Mache dich, mem Geist, bereit.</item>
  <item>*116. Du Friedef&uuml;rst, Herr Jesu Christ.</item>
  <item>117. Sei Lob und Ehr' dem h&ouml;chsten Gut.</item>
  <item>118. O Jesu Christ, mein's Lebens Licht.<note place="foot">
        <p>
        Also in N.B.G. XVII. (1 and 2).
        </p>
        </note></item>
  <item>*119. Preise, Jerusalem, den Herrn.</item>
  <item>120. Gott, man lobet dich in der Stille.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XXV (1)."> 1875 [1878]. Die Kunst der Fuge: 1749-1750 Ed. Wilhelm Rust. (P. bk. 218)
 <list>
  <item>Contrapunctus 1-14</item>
  <item>Four Canons I</item>
  <item>Two Fugues for two Claviers)</item>
  <item>Fugue on three subjects )</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XXV (2)"> 1875 [1878], Orgelwerke. Zweiter Band. Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
 <list>
  <item>(1) Orgelb&uuml;chlein (N. bk. 15), containing Preludes on the following melodies:<note place="foot">
        <p>
        For an exposition of Bach's design in the <q>Orgelb&uuml;chlein,</q> see the present writer's articles in <q>The Musical Times</q> for January_March 1917, and <q>Bach's Chorals,</q> Part III. See N.B.G. II. (1) for an arrangement of the Preludes for two pianofortes.
        </p>
        </note>
   <list>
    <item><emph>Advent&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="1.">Nun komm der Heiden Heiland.</item>
       <item n="2.">Gott, durch deine G&uuml;te, or, Gottes Sohn ist kommen.</item>
       <item n="3.">Herr Christ, der ein'ge Gottes-Sohn, or, Herr Gott, nun sei gepreiset.</item>
       <item n="4."> Lob sei dem allm&auml;chtigen Gott.</item>
	 </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>Christmas&mdash;</emph>
	 <list>
       <item n="5.">Puer natus in Bethlehem.</item>
       <item n="6.">Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ.</item>
       <item n="7.">Der Tag, der ist so freudenreich.</item>
       <item n="8.">Vom Himmel hoch, da komm' ich her.</item>
       <item n="9.">Vom Himmel kam der Engel Schaar.</item>
       <item n="10.">In dulci jubilo.</item>
       <item n="11.">Lobt Gott, ihr Christen, allzugleich.</item>
       <item n="12.">Jesu, meine Freude.</item>
       <item n="13.">Christum wir sollen loben schon.</item>
       <item n="14.">Wir Christenleut'.</item>
      </list>
	  </item>
    <item><emph>New Year&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="15."> Helft mir Gottes G&uuml;te preisen.</item>
       <item n="16."> Das alte Jahr vergangen ist.</item>
       <item n="17."> In dir ist Freude.</item>
      </list>
	 </item>
    <item><emph>Feast of the Purification of the B.V.M.&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="18."> Mit Fried' und Freud' ich fahr' dahin.</item>
       <item n="19."> Herr Gott, nun schleuss den Himmel auf.</item>
      </list>
	 </item>
    <item><emph>Passiontide&mdash;</emph>
	  <list>
       <item n="20.">O Lamm Gottes, unschuldig.</item>
       <item n="21.">Christe, du Lamm Gottes.</item>
       <item n="22.">Christ us, der uns selig macht.</item>
       <item n="23.">Da Jesus an dem Kreuze stund.</item>
       <item n="24.">O Mensch, bewein' dein' S&uuml;nde gross.</item>
       <item n="25.">Wir danken dir, Herr Jesu Christ.</item>
       <item n="26.">Hilf Gott, dass mir's gelinge.</item>
      </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>Easter&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="27.">Christ lag in Todesbanden.</item>
       <item n="28.">Jesus Christus, unser Heiland, der den Tod.</item>
       <item n="29.">Christ ist erstanden (three verses).</item>
       <item n="30.">Erstanden ist der heil'ge Christ.</item>
       <item n="31.">Erschienen ist der herrliche Tag.</item>
       <item n="32.">Heut' triumphiret Gottes Sohn.</item>
      </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>Whitsunday&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="33.">Komm, Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer, heiliger Geist.</item>
      </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>Trinity Sunday&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="34.">Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend'.</item>
       <item n="35-6.">Liebster Jesu, wir sind hier (two settings). </item>
      </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>The Catechism&mdash;</emph>
	  <list>
       <item n="37.">Dies sind die heil'gen zehn Gebot.</item>
       <item n="38.">Vater unser im Himmelreich.</item>
      </list>
	  </item>
    <item><emph>Penitence and Amendment&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="39.">Durch Adam's Fall ist ganz verderbt.</item>
       <item n="40.">Es ist das Heil uns kommen her.</item>
      </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>Christian Conduct and Experience&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="41.">Ich ruf' zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ.</item>
      </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>In Time of Trouble&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="42.">In dich hab' ich gehoffet, Herr.</item>
       <item n="43.">Wenn wir in h&ouml;chsten Nothen sein.</item>
       <item n="44.">Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten.</item>
      </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>Death and the Grave&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="45.">Alle Menschen m&uuml;ssen sterben.</item>
      </list>
	</item>
    <item><emph>The Life Eternal&mdash;</emph>
     <list>
       <item n="46.">Ach wie nichtig, ach wie fl&uuml;chtig.</item>
      </list>
	</item>
</list>
</item>

  <item>(2) Six Chorals (Sch&uuml;bler) (N. bk. 16) on the following melodies:
   <list>
    <item>Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme.</item>
    <item>Wo soll ich fliehen hin, <emph>or</emph>, Auf meinen lieben Gott.</item>
    <item>Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten.</item>
    <item>Meine Seele erhebt den Herren.</item>
    <item>Ach bleib bei uns, Herr Jesu Christ.</item>
    <item>Kommst du nun, Jesu, vom Himmel herunter.</item>
   </list>
  </item>

  <item>(3) Eighteen Chorals (N. bk. 17) on the following melodies:
   <list>
    <item n="1., 2.">Komm, heiliger Geist, Herre Gott (two settings).</item>
    <item n="3.">An Wasserfl&uuml;ssen Babylon.</item>
    <item n="4.">Schm&uuml;cke dich, O liebe Seele.</item>
    <item n="5.">Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend'.</item>
    <item n="6.">O Lamm Gottes unschuldig (three verses).</item>
    <item n="7.">Nun danket Alle Gott.</item>
    <item n="8.">Von Gott will ich nicht lassen.</item>
    <item n="9, 10, 11.">Nun komm der Heiden Heiland (three settings).</item>
    <item n="12, 13, 14.">Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr' (three settings).</item>
    <item n="15, 16.">Jesus Christus, unser Heiland, der von uns (two settings).</item>
    <item n="17.">Komm, Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer, heiliger Geist.</item>
    <item n="18.">Vor deinen Thron tret' ich, or, Wenn wir in h&ouml;chsten N&ouml;then sein.</item>
  </list>
</item>

  <item>(4) Older texts of the <q>Orgelb&uuml;lein</q> and <q>Eighteen</q> Chorals:
    <list>
    <item n="1.">Christus, der uns selig macht (Orgelb&uuml;lein No. 22) (P. bk. 244 p. 108).</item>
    <item n="2.">Komm, Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer, heiliger Geist (Orgelb&uuml;lein No. 33) (P. bk. 246 p. 86A).</item>
    <item n="3.">Komm, heiliger Geist, Herre Gott (Eighteen No. 1) (P. bk. 246 p. 86).</item>
    <item n="4.">Ditto (Eighteen No. 2) (P. bk. 246 p. 88).</item>
    <item n="5.">An Wasserfl&uuml;ssen Babylon (Eighteen No. 3) (P. bk. 245 p. 103).</item>
    <item n="6.">Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend' (Eighteen No. 5) (P. bk. 245 pp. 107, 108 prints two of the three Variants).</item>
    <item n="9.">O Lamm Gottes unschuldig (Eighteen No. 6)(P. bk. 246 p. 97).</item>
    <item n="10.">Von Gott will ich nicht lassen (Eighteen No. 8) (P. bk. 246 p. 102).</item>
    <item n="11.">Nun komm der Heiden Heiland (Eighteen No. 9) (P. bk. 246 p. 92).</item>
    <item n="12.">Ditto (Eighteen No. 10) (P. bk. 246 pp. 93, 94).</item>
    <item n="14.">Ditto (Eighteen No. 11) (P. bk. 246 p. 96).</item>
    <item n="15.">Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr' (Eighteen No. 13) (P. bk. 245 p. 100).</item>
    <item n="16.">Allein Gott in der H&ouml;' sei Ehr' (Eighteen No. 14) (P. bk. 245 p. 97).</item>
    <item n="17.">Jesus Christus unser Heiland (Eighteen No. 15) (P. bk. 245 p. 112).</item>
    </list>
  </item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XXVI."> 1876 [1878]. Kirchencantaten. Dreizehnter Band. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;rffel.
  <list>
    <item n="121.">Christum wir sollen loben schon.</item>
    <item n="122.">Das neugebor'ne Kindelein.</item>
    <item n="123.">Liebster Immanuel, Herzog der Frommen.</item>
    <item n="124.">Meinen Jesum lass' ich nicht.</item>
    <item n="125.">Mit Fried' und Freud' ich fahr' dahin.</item>
    <item n="126.">Erhalt' uns, Herr, bei deinem Wort.</item>
    <item n="127.">Herr Jesu Christ, wahr'r Mensch und Gott.</item>
    <item n="128.">Auf Christi Himmelfahrt allein.</item>
    <item n="129.">Gelobet sei der Herr.</item>
    <item n="130.">Herr Gott, dich loben alle wir.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXVII (1)."> 1877 [18791. Kammermusik. Sechster Band. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;rffel.
  <list>
   <item>Three Sonatas (Suites), in G minor, A minor,<note place="foot">
           <p>
           See B.G. XLII. for a Clavier version.
           </p>
           </note>
          C major,<note place="foot">
           <p>
           See B.G. XLII. for a Clavier version.
           </p>
           </note>
          for Violin Solo (Nos. 1, 3, 5 in P. bk. 228).</item>
   <item>Three Partitas (Suites, Sonatas), in B minor, D minor, E major,1 for Violin Solo (Nos. 2, 4, 6 in P. bk. 228).</item>
   <item>Six Suites (Sonatas), in G major, D minor, C major, E flat major, C minor, D major, for Violoncello Solo (P. bks. 238a, 238).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXVII (2)."> 1877 [1878]. Thematisches Verzeichniss der Kirchencantaten No. 1-120. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;rffel.
<p>
[Note.&mdash;The Thematic Catalogue is completed in B.G. XLVI. (P. bk. 270b).]
</p>
</item>

<item n="XXVIII."> 1878 [1881]. Kirchencantaten. Vierzehnter Band Ed. Wilhelm Rust.
  <list>
   <item n="131.">Aus der Tiefe rufe ich, Herr, zu dir.</item>
   <item n="132.">Bereitet die Wege, bereitet die Bahn.</item>
   <item n="133.">Ich freue mich in dir.</item>
   <item n="134.">Ein Herz, das seinen Jesum lebend weiss [and Variant].</item>
   <item n="135.">Ach Herr, mich armen Sunder.</item>
   <item n="136.">Erforsche mich, Gott.</item>
   <item n="137.">Lobe den Herren, den m&auml;chtigen K&uuml;onig.</item>
   <item n="138.">Warum betr&uuml;bst du dich, mein Herz?</item>
   <item n="139.">Wohl dem, der sioh auf seinen Gott.</item>
   <item n="*140.">Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme.<note place="foot">
          <p>
          Boosey and Co. also publish an English edition.
          </p>
          </note>
Mit Gnaden bekrone der Himmel die Zeiten (No. 134 adapted).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXIX."> 1879 [1881]. Kammermusik f&uuml;r Gesang, Dritter Band. Ed. Paul Graf Waldersee.
  <list>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Was mir behagt, ist nur die muntre Jagd.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Non sa che sia dolore.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: O holder Tag, erw&uuml;nschte Zeit (Wedding).</item>
    <item>Church Cantata No. 194: Hochsterw&uuml;nschtes Freudenfest.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Schweigt stille, plaudert nicht.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Mer hahn en neue Oberkeet.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Mit Gnaden bekr&ouml;ne der Himmel die Zeiten.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: O angenehme Melodei.</item>
    <item>Instrumental Piece for Violin, Flute, and Continuo. (Not in P.).</item>
  </list>
</item>


<item n="XXX."> 1880 [1884]. Kirchencantaten. F&uuml;nfzehnter Band. Ed. Paul Graf Waldersee.
  <list>
    <item>141. Das ist je gewisslich wahr.</item>
    <item>142. Uns ist ein Kind geboren.</item>
    <item>143. Lobe den Herren, meine Seele.</item>
    <item>144. Nimm, was dein ist, und gehe hin.</item>
    <item>145. So du mit deinem Munde bekennest Jesum.</item>
    <item>146. Wir m&uuml;ssen durch viel Tr&uuml;bsal in das Reich Gottes eingehen.</item>
    <item>147. Herz und Mund und That und Leben.</item>
    <item>148. Bringet dem Herrn Ehre seines Namens.</item>
    <item>*149. Man singet mit Freuden vom Sieg.</item>
    <item>150. Nach dir, Herr, verlanget mich.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<pb n="242" />

<item n="XXXI (1)."> 1881 [1885] Orchesterwerke. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;rffel. (P. bk. 219)
  <list>
    <item>Overture in C major (Strings, Ob. 1 and 2, Fagotto) (P. bk. 267).</item>
    <item>Overture B minor (Strings, Flauto traverso) (P. bk. 268). </item>
    <item>Overture D major (Strings, Ob. 1 and 2, Trombe 1, 2, 3, Timpani) (P. bk. 269). </item>
    <item>Overture D major (Strings, Ob. 1, 2, 3, Fagotto, Trombe 1, 2, 3, Timpani) (P. bk. 2068).</item>
    <item>Sinfonia in F major (Strings, Ob. 1, 2, 3, Fagotto, Corno da caccia 1 and 2).<note place="foot">
<p>
This is a shortened form of the first Brandenberg Concerto (see B.G. XIX. no. 1).  It consists of the Allegro, Adagio, Minuet, Trio I. and Trio II. of the latter, and omits its second Allegro and Polacca.
</p>
</note></item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXXI (2)."> 1881 [1885] Musikalisches Opfer. 1747. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;rffel.
  <list>
    <item>Ricercare a tre voci.</item>
    <item>Canon perpetuus super thema regium.</item>
    <item>Canones diversi 1-5.</item>
    <item>Fuga canonica in Epidiapente.</item>
    <item>Ricercare a sei voci.</item>
<item>Two Canons.</item>
<item>Sonata in C minor, for Flute, Violin, Clavier</item>
<item>Canone perpetuo (Flute, Violin, Clavier)<note place="foot">
<p>
The Appendix contains Joh. Philipp Kernberger's solutions of the Canons and his expansion of the figured bass of the Clavier part of the Sonata.
</p>
</note></item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXXI (3)."> 1881 [1885]. Kammermusik. Siebenter Band. Ed. Paul Graf Waldersee.       <list>
  <item>Two Concertos for three Claviers and Orchestra (Strings): No. 1 in D minor (P. bk. 258).<note place="foot">
<p>
See publications of the N.B.G. XIV. (2) no. 2.
</p>
</note></item>
    <item>No. 2 in C major (P. bk. 259).).<note place="foot">
<p>
See publications of the N.B.G. XIV. (2) no. 2.
</p>
</note></item>
  </list>
</item>

<pb n="243" />

<item n="XXXII."> 1882 [1886]. Kirchencantaten. Sechzehnter Band. Ed. Ernst Naumann.
  <list>
    <item>151. S&uuml;sser Trost, mein Jesus kommt.</item>
    <item>*152. Tritt auf die Glaubensbahn.</item>
    <item>153. Schau', lieber Gott, wie meine Feind'.</item>
    <item>154. Mein liebster Jesus ist verloren.</item>
    <item>155. Mein Gott, wie lang', ach lange.</item>
    <item>156. Ich steh' mit einem Fuss im Grabe.</item>
    <item>157. Ich lasse dich nicht.</item>
    <item>158. Der Friede sei mit dir.</item>
    <item>159. Sehet, wir geh'n binauf gen Jerusalem.</item>
    <item>160. Ich weiss, das mein Erl&ouml;ser lebt.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXXIII."> 1883 [1887]. Kirchencantaten. Siebzehnter Band: Ed. Franz W&uuml;lner.
  <list>
    <item>161. Komm, du s&uuml;sse Todesstunde.</item>
    <item>162. Ach, ich sehe, jetzt da ich zur Hochzeit gehe.</item>
    <item>163. Nur Jedem das Seine.</item>
    <item>164. Ihr, die ihr euch von Christo nennet.</item>
    <item>165. O heil'ges Geist- und Wasserbad.</item>
    <item>166. Wo gehest du bin?</item>
    <item>*167. Ihr Menschen, r&uuml;hmet Gottes Liebe.</item>
    <item>168. Thue Rechnung! Donnerwort.</item>
    <item>169. Gott soll allein mein Herze haben.</item>
    <item>170. Vergn&uuml;gte Ruh', beliebte Seelenlust.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXXIV."> 1884 [1887]. Kammermusik f&uuml;r Gesang. Vierter Band. Ed. Paul Graf Waldersee.
  <list>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Durchlaucht'ster Leopold.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Schwingt freudig euch empor, <emph>or</emph>, Die Freude reget sich.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Hercules auf dem Scheidewege, <emph>or</emph>, Lasst uns sorgen, lasst uns wachen.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: T&ouml;net, ihr Pauken! Erschallet, Trompeten.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Preise dein Gl&uuml;cke, gesegnetes Sachsen.</item>
<pb n="244" />
    <item>Secular Cantata: Angenehmes Wiederau.</item>
    <item>Secular Cantata: Auf, schmetternde T&ouml;ne der muntern Trompeten.<note place="foot">
<p>
Text and music are identical with the version in B.G. XX. (2).
</p>
</note></item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXXV."> 1885 [1888]. Kirchencantaten. Achtzehnter Band. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;rffel.
  <list>
    <item>171. Gott, wie dein Name, so ist auch dein Ruhm.</item>
    <item>172. Erschallet, ihr Lieder.</item>
    <item>173. Erh&ouml;tes Fleisch und Blut.</item>
    <item>174. Ich liebe den H&ouml;chsten von ganzem Gem&uuml;the.</item>
    <item>175. Er rufet seinen Schafen mit Namen.</item>
    <item>176. Es ist ein trotzig und verzagt Ding.</item>
    <item>177. Ich ruf' zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ.</item>
    <item>178. Wo Gott der Herr nicht bei uns h&auml;lt.</item>
    <item>179. Siehe zu, dass deine Gottesfurcht nicht Heuchelei sei.</item>
    <item>*180. Schm&uuml;cke dich, O liebe Seele.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XXXVI."> 1886 [1890]. Clavierwerke. Vierter Band. Ed. Ernst Naumann.
  <list>
  <item n="1."> Suite in A minor (Appendix version in P. bk. 214).</item>
  <item n="2."> Suite in E flat major (P. bk. 214).<note place="foot">
<p>
Another Allemande to the Suite is in B.G. XXXVI. 217 (also in P.).
</p>
</note></item>
  <item n="3."> Suite (Overture), in F major (P. bk. 215).</item>
  <item n="4."> Sonata in D major (P. bk. 215).</item>
  <item n="10."> Chromatic Fantasia and Fugue in D minor (P. bk. 207).</item>
  <item n="11."> Fantasia and Fugue in A minor (P. bk. 208).</item>
  <item n="12."> Prelude and Fugue in E flat major (not in P.).</item>
  <item n="13."> Prelude and Fugue in A minor (P. bk. 211).</item>
  <item n="14."> Prelude and Fugue in A minor (P. bk. 200).</item>
  <item n="15."> Prelude and Fughetta in D minor (P. bk. 200).</item>
  <item n="16."> Prelude and Fughetta in E minor (P. bk. 200).</item>
  <item n="17."> Prelude and Fughetta in F major (P. bk. 214).<note place="foot">
<p>
The subject of the Fughetta is the same as that of Fugue No. 17 in the second part of the <q>Well-tempered Clavier.</q>
</p>
</note></item>
  <item n="18."> Do. do. G major (P. bk. 214).<note place="foot">
<p>
The Prelude is No. 11 in Peters (B.G. xxxvi. 220). The Fughetta is his No. 10. It is the same subject an that of Fugue 16 in the second part of the <q>Well-tempered Clavier.</q> An alternative Prelude (P. 214 p. 78) is in the Appendix (p. 220).
</p>
</note></item>
  <item n="19."> Twelve Preludes for Beginners (P. bk. 200). 20 Six Little Preludes (P. bk. 200).</item>
  <item n="21."> Prelude in C major (for Organ, N. bk. 12 p. 94).</item>
  <item n="22."> Do. (Fantasia) in C minor (not in P.).</item>
  <item n="23."> Do. do. in A minor (P. bk. 215).</item>
  <item n="24."> Fantasia in G minor (P. bk. 215).</item>
  <item n="25."> Do. C minor (P. bk. 207).</item>
  <item n="26."> Do. (on a Rondo), in C minor (not in P.).</item>
  <item n="27."> Do. C minor (P. bk. 212).</item>
  <item n="28."> Fughetta in C minor (two-parte) (P. bk. 200).</item>
  <item n="29."> Fugue in E minor (P. bk. 212).</item>
  <item n="30."> Do. A major (P. bk. 212).</item>
  <item n="31."> Do. C major (for Organ, N. bk. 12 p. 100).</item>
  <item n="32."> Do. A minor (P. bk. 212).</item>
  <item n="33."> Do. D minor (P. bk. 212 p. 61).</item>
  <item n="34."> Do. A major (P. bk. 215 p. 52).</item>
  <item n="35."> Do. A major (P. bk. 215 p. 57).</item>
  <item n="36."> Do. B minor (Theme by Albinoni) (P. bk. 214).</item>
  <item n="37."> Do. C major (P. bk. 200 p. 54).</item>
  <item n="38."> Do. C major (P. bk. 200 p. 56).</item>
  <item n="39."> Do. D minor (P. bk. 212 p. 59).</item>
  <item n="40."> Capriccio in B flat major, sopra la lontananza del suo fratello dilettissimo (P. bk. 208).</item>
  <item n="41."> Do. E major, in honorem J.C.Bach (P. bk. 215).</item>
  <item n="42."> Aria variata in A minor (P. bk. 215).</item>
  <item n="43."> Three Minuets, in G major, G minor, G major (P. bk. 215).</item>
  <item n="44."> Fragment of a Suite in F minor (P. bk. 212).</item>
  <item n="45."> Do. do. A major (P. bk. 1959, p. 3).</item>
  <item n="46."> Prelude, Gavotte II, and Minuet in E flat major.<note place="foot">
<p>
They are described as <q>zur vierten franz&ouml;sischen Suite.</q> The Prelude is in P. bk. 1959 p. 67.
</p>
</note></item>

<pb n="246" />
  <item n="47."> Two Minuet-Trios, in C minor and B minor.<note place="foot">
<p>
Written respectively for the second and third French Suites (not in P.).
</p>
</note></item>
  <item n="48."> <q>Applicatio</q> in C major.<note place="foot">
<p>
A fingered exercise.
</p>
</note></item>
  <item n="49."> Prelude in A minor (not in P.).</item>
  <item n="50."> Do. (unfinished) in E minor (not in P.).</item>
  <item n="51."> Fugue (unfinished) in C minor (P. bk. 212 p. 88). <note place="foot">
<p>
The Appendices of the volume contain variant readings of movements elsewhere contained in it, and of the first, third, and sixth Preludes and Fugues in the second part of the <q>Well-tempered Clavier.</q>
</p>
</note></item>
</list>
</item>

<item n="XXXVII."> 1887 [1891]. Kirchencantaten. Neunzehnter Band. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;rffel.
 <list>
   <item n="181.">Leichtgesinnte Flattergeister.</item>
   <item n="182.">Himmelsk&ouml;nig, sei willkommen.</item>
   <item n="183.">Sie werden euch in den Bann thun (?1735).</item>
   <item n="184.">Erw&uuml;nschtes Freudenlicht.</item>
   <item n="185.">Barmherziges Herze der ewigen Liebe.</item>
   <item n="186.">Aergre dich, 0 Seele, nicht.</item>
   <item n="187.">Es wartet Alles auf dich.</item>
   <item n="188.">Ich habe meine Zuversicht.<note place="foot">
<p>
See B.G. XLV. (1) Appendix.
</p>
</note></item>
   <item n="189.">Meine Seele r&uuml;hmt und preist.</item>
   <item n="*190.">Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied.</item>
 </list>
</item>


<item n="XXXVIII."> 1888 [1891]. Orgelwerke. Dritter Band. Ed. Ernst Naumann.
  <list>
   <item n="1.">Prelude and Fugue in C minor (N. bk. 2 p. 48).</item>
   <item n="2.">Prelude and Fugue in G major (N. bk. 7 p. 80).</item>
   <item n="3.">Prelude and Fugue in A minor (N. bk. 10 p. 208).</item>
   <item n="4."> Eight Short Preludes and Fugues in C major, D minor, E minor, F major, G major, G minor, A minor, B flat major (N. bk. 1).</item>
   <item n="5.">Fantasia and Fugue in A minor (N. bk. 12 p. 60).</item>
   <item n="6.">Fantasia con Imitazione in B minor (N. bk. 12 p. 71).</item>
<pb n="247" />
   <item n="7.">Fantasia in C major (N. bk. 12 p. 92).</item>
   <item n="8.">Fantasia in C minor (N. bk. 3 p. 57).</item>
   <item n="9.">Fantasia in G major (N. bk. 12 p. 75).</item>
   <item n="10.">Fantasia in G major (N. bk. 9 p. 168).</item>
   <item n="11.">Prelude in C major (N. bk. 12 p. 91).</item>
   <item n="12.">Prelude in G major (N. bk. 2 p. 30).</item>
   <item n="13.">Prelude in A minor (N. bk. 10 p. 238).</item>
   <item n="14.">Fugue (Theme by Legrenzi) in C minor (and Variant) (N. bk. 10 p. 230).</item>
   <item n="15.">Fugue in C minor (N. bk. 12 p. 95). 16 Do. G major (N. bk. 12 p. 86).</item>
   <item n="17.">Fugue G major (N. bk. 12 p. 55).</item>
   <item n="18.">Fugue G minor (N. bk. 3 p. 84).</item>
   <item n="19.">Fugue B minor (Theme by Corelli) (N. bk. 3 p. 60).</item>
   <item n="20.">Canzona in D minor (N. bk. 2 p. 34).</item>
   <item n="21.">Allabreve in D major (N. bk. 2 p. 26).</item>
   <item n="22.">Pastorale in F major (N. bk. 12 p. 102).</item>
   <item n="23.">Trio in D minor (N. bk. 2 p. 54).</item>
   <item n="24.">Four Concertos after Antonio Vivaldi:<note place="foot">
<p>
Only nos. 2 and 3 are derived from Vivaldi.
</p>
     
</note>
      <list>
        <item>No. 1, in G major (N. bk. 11 no. I).<note place="foot">
              <p>
              A variant text is in B.G. XLII. 282.
              </p>
              </note></item>
        <item>No. 2, in A minor (N. bk. 11 no. 2).<note place="foot">
               <p>
                Vivaldi's text of the first movement is in the Appendix (p. 229).
               </p>
               </note></item>
        <item>No. 3, in C major (N. bk. 11 no. 3).</item>
        <item>No. 4, in C major (N. bk. 11 no. 4).</item>
      </list>
      </item>

   <item n="25."> Fantasia (incomplete) in C major (not in N. or P.).<note place="foot">
          <p>
          See B.G. XLIII. (2) sec. 1 no. 2.
          </p>
          </note></item>

   <item n="26."> Fugue (incomplete) in C minor (not in N. or P.).</item>
   <item n="27."> Pedal Exercise in G minor (not in N. or P.).</item>
   <item n="28."> Fugue (authenticity doubtful) in C major (not in N. or P.).</item>
   <item n="29."> Fugue (authenticity doubtful) in D major (N. bk. 12 p. 83).<note place="foot">
              <p>
              The fugal subject is taken from the Allabreve.
              </p>
              </note></item>
   <item n="30."> Fugue (authenticity doubtful) in G minor (N. bk. 2 p. 41).</item>
   <item n="31."> Trio in C minor (N. bk. 12 p. 108).</item>
   <item n="32."> Aria in F major (N. bk. 12 p. 112).</item>
   <item n="33."> Kleinea harmonisches Labyrinth (authenticity doubtful) (P. bk. 2067 p. 16) (not in N.).</item>
  </list>
 </item>

<pb n="248" />

<item n="XXXIX.">1889 [1892]. Motetten, Chor&auml;le und Lieder. Ed. Franz W&uuml;llner.
  <list>
    <item n="(1)">Motets:
     <list>
       <item>Motet: *Singet dem Herrn ein neues Lied.</item>
       <item>Motet: *Der Geist hilft unsrer Schwachheit auf.<note place="foot">
          <p>
          Bach's instrumental accompaniments are in the Appendix (p. 143).
          </p>
          </note></item>
       <item>Motet: *Jesu, meine Freude.</item>
       <item>Motet: *F&uuml;rchte dich nicht, ich bin bei dir.</item>
       <item>Motet: *Komm, Jesu, komm.</item>
       <item>Motet: * Lobet den Herrn, alle Heiden.</item>
       <item>Motet: *Ich lasse dich nicht, du segnest mich denn (by Johann Christoph Bach).</item>
       <item>Motet: *Sei Lob und Preis mit Ehren (the second number, Nun lob' mein' Seel' den Herrn, of Cantata 28).</item>
     </list>
    </item>
    <item n="(2)">185 Chorals harmonised by Bach, from the collection made by Carl Philipp Emmanuel Bach:<note place="foot">
        <p>
C. P. E. Bach's collection of his father's Choral settings was published by Immanuel Breitkopf in four volumes between the years 1784-87.  They are all inoluded in Breitkopf and Haertel's edition (1898) of Bach s <q>Choralges&auml;nge</q>; the numerals in brackets in the above list indicate the position of each Choral in that collection.  The latter includes also the simple four-part Chorals from the Oratorios and Cantatas; hence the numeration of that volume and B.G. XXXIX. is not uniform.
        </p>
        </note>
      <list>

        <item n="1 (1)."> Ach bleib' bei uns, Herr Jesu Christ.</item>
        <item n="2 (2)."> Ach Gott, erh&ouml;r' mein Seufzen und Wehklagen.</item>
        <item n="3 (3)."> Ach Gott und Herr, wie gross und schwer.</item>
        <item n="4 (385)."> Ach lieben Christen, seid getrost (Wo Gott der Herr nicht bei uns h&auml;lt).</item>
        <item n="5 (388)."> W&auml;r' Gott nicht mit uns diese Zeit (Wo Gott der Herr nicht bei uns h&auml;lt).<note place="foot">
           <p>
           The bracket states the title by which the tune is better known.
           </p>
           </note></item>
        <item n="6 (383).">Wo Gott der Herr nicht bei uns h&auml;lt.</item>
        <item n="7(10).">Ach, was soll ich S&uuml;nder machen.</item>
        <item n="8 (12).">Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr.</item>
        <item n="9 (15).">Allein zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ.</item>
        <item n="10 (17).">Alle Menschen m&uuml;ssen sterben.</item>
        <item n="11 (19).">Alles ist an Gottes Segen.</item>
<pb n="249" />
        <item n="12(20)."> Als der g&uuml;tige Gott.</item>
        <item n="13 (21)."> Als Jesus Christus in der Nacht.</item>
        <item n="14 (22)."> Als vierzig Tag' nach Ostern war'n.</item>
        <item n="15 (23)."> An Wassern&uuml;ssen Babylon.</item>
        <item n="16(24)."> Auf, auf mein Herz.</item>
        <item n="17 (30)."> Aus meines Herzens Grunde.</item>
        <item n="18 (157)."> Befiehl du deine Wege (Herzlich thut mich verlangen).</item>
        <item n="19 (158)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="20 (32)."> Befiehl du deine Wege.</item>
        <item n="21 (33)."> Christ, der du bist der helle Tag.</item>
        <item n="22 (34)."> Christe, der du bist Tag und Licht.</item>
        <item n="23 (35)."> Christe, du Beistand deiner Kreuzgemeinde.</item>
        <item n="24 (36)."> Christ ist erstanden.</item>
        <item n="25 (38)."> Christ lag in Todesbanden.</item>
        <item n="26(39)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="27 (43)."> Christ, unser Herr, zum Jordan kam.</item>
        <item n="28 (46)."> Christus, der ist mein Leben.</item>
        <item n="29 (47)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="30 (48)."> Christus, der uns selig macht.</item>
        <item n="31 (51)."> Christus ist erstanden.</item>
        <item n="32 (52)."> Da der Herr zu Tische sass.</item>
        <item n="33 (53)."> Danket dem Herren, denn er ist sehr freundlich. </item>
        <item n="34 (54)."> Dank sei Gott in der H&ouml;he.</item>
        <item n="35 (55)."> Das alte Jahr vergangen ist.</item>
        <item n="36 (56)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="37 (57)."> Das walt' Gott Vater und Gott Sohn.</item>
        <item n="38 (58)."> Das walt' mein Gott, Vater, Sohn.</item>
        <item n="39 (59)."> Den Vater dort oben.</item>
        <item n="40 (60)."> Der du bist drei in Einigkeit.</item>
        <item n="41 (61)."> Der Tag, der ist so freudenreich.</item>
        <item n="42 (62)."> Des heil'gen Geistes reiche Gnad'.</item>
        <item n="43 (63)."> Die Nacht ist kommen.</item>
        <item n="44 (64)."> Die Sohn' hat sich mit ihrem Glanz.</item>
        <item n="45 (65)."> Dies sind die heil'gen zehn Gebot.</item>
        <item n="46 (67)."> Dir, dir, Jehovah, will ich singen (Bach's   melody).</item>
        <item n="47 (70)."> Du grosser Schmerzensmann.</item>
        <item n="48 (71)."> Du, 0 sch&ouml;nes Weltgeb&auml;ude.</item>
        <item n="49 (74)."> Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott.</item>
        <item n="50 (75)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="51 (77)."> Eins ist noth, ach Herr, dies Eine.</item>
        <item n="52 (78)."> Erbarm' dich mein, 0 Herre Gott.</item>
        <item n="53 (85)."> Erstanden ist der heil'ge Christ.</item>
        <item n="54 (262)."> Est ist gewisslich an der Zeit (Nun freut euch, lieben Christen g'mein).</item>
        <item n="55 (92)."> Es spricht der Unweisen Mund wohl.</item>
        <item n="56 (93)."> Es steh'n vor Gottes Throne.</item>
        <item n="57 (94)."> Es wird schier der letzte Tag herkommen.</item>
        <item n="58 (95)."> Es wol' uns Gott gen&auml;dig sein.</item>
        <item n="59 (96)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="60 (106)."> F&uuml;r Freuden lasst uns springen.</item>
        <item n="61 (107)."> Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ.</item>
        <item n="62 (111)."> Gieb dich zufrieden und sei stille (Bach's melody).</item>
        <item n="63 (112)."> Gott, der du selber bist das Licht.</item>
        <item n="64 (113)."> Gott der Vater wohn' uns bei.</item>
        <item n="65 (115)."> Gottes Sohn ist kommen.</item>
        <item n="66 (116)."> Gott hat das Evangelium.</item>
        <item n="67 (117)."> Gott lebet noch.</item>
        <item n="68 (118)."> Gottlob, es geht nunmehr zum Ende.</item>
        <item n="69 (119)."> Gott sei gelobet und gebenedeiet.</item>
        <item n="70 (120)."> Gott sei uns gn&auml;dig und barmherzig.</item>
        <item n="71 (121)."> Meine Seele erhebet den Herrn.</item>
        <item n="72 (123a)."> Heilig, Heilig, Heilig!</item>
        <item n="73 (129)."> Herr Gott, dich loben alle wir.</item>
        <item n="74 (132)."> F&uuml;r deinen Thron tret' ich hiermit (Herr Gott dich loben alle wir).</item>
        <item n="75 (133)."> Herr Gott dich loben wir.</item>
        <item n="76 (136)."> Herr, ich denk' an jene Zeit.</item>
        <item n="77 (137)."> Herr, ich habe missgehandelt.</item>
        <item n="78 (138)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="79 (139)."> Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend'.</item>
        <item n="80 (140)."> Herr Jesu Christ, du hast bereit't.</item>
        <item n="81 (141)."> Herr Jesu Christ, du h&ouml;chstes Gut.</item>
        <item n="82 (145)."> Herr Jesu Christ, mein's Lebens Licht.</item>
        <item n="83 (146)."> Herr Jesu Christ, wahr' Mensch und Gott.</item>
        <item n="84 (148)."> Herr, nun lass in Friede.</item>
        <item n="85 (149)."> Herr, straf' mich nicht in deinem Zorn.</item>
        <item n="86 (151)."> Herr, wie du willst, so Schick's mit mir.</item>
        <item n="87 (152)."> Herzlich lieb hab' ich dich, 0 Herr.</item>
        <item n="88 (170)."> Heut' ist, O Mensch, ein grosser Trauertag.</item>
        <item n="89 (171)."> Heut' triumphiret Gottes Sohn.</item>
        <item n="90 (172)."> Hilf, Gott, dass mir's gelinge.</item>
        <item n="91 (173)."> Hilf, Herr Jesu, lass gelingen.</item>
        <item n="92 (174)."> Ich bin ja, Herr, in deiner Macht (Bach's melody).</item>
        <item n="93 (175)."> Ich dank' dir, Gott, f&uuml;r all' Wohlthat.</item>
        <item n="94 (176)."> Ich dank' dir, lieber Herre.</item>
        <item n="95 (177)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="96 (179)."> Ich dank' dir schon durch deinen Sohn.</item>
        <item n="97 (180)."> Ich danke dir, O Gott, in deinem Throne.</item>
        <item n="98 (182)."> Ich hab' mein' Sach' Gott heimgestellt.</item>
        <item n="99 (185)."> Jesu, der du meine Seele.</item>
        <item n="100 (186)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="101 (187)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="102 (189)."> Jesu, der du selbst so wohl.</item>
        <item n="103 (190)."> Jesu, du mein liebstes Leben.</item>
        <item n="104 (191)."> Jesu, Jesu, du bist mein (Bach's melody).</item>
        <item n="105 (195)."> Jesu, meine Freude.</item>
        <item n="106 (363)."> Jesu, meiner Seelen Wonne (Werde munter, mein Gem&uuml;the).</item>
        <item n="107 (364)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="108 (202)."> Jesu, meines Herzens Freud'.</item>
        <item n="109 (203)."> Jesu, nun sei gepreiset.</item>
        <item n="110 (206)."> Jesus Christus, unser Heiland, der von uns.</item>
        <item n="111 (207)."> Jesus Christus, unser Heiland, der den Tod.</item>
        <item n="112 (208)."> Jesus, meine Zuversicht.</item>
        <item n="113 (210)."> Ihr Gestirn', ihr hohlen L&uuml;fte.</item>
        <item n="114 (211)."> In allen meinen Thaten.</item>
        <item n="115 (215)."> In dulci jubilo.</item>
        <item n="116 (217)."> Keinen hat Gott verlassen.</item>
        <item n="117 (218)."> Komm, Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer, heiliger Geist.</item>
        <item n="118 (225)."> Kyrie! Gott Vater in Ewigkeit.</item>
        <item n="119 (226)."> Lass, O Herr, dein Ohr sich neigen.</item>
        <item n="120 (228)."> Liebster Jesu, wir sind hier.</item>
<pb n="252" />
        <item n="121 (232)."> Lobet den Herren, denn er ist sehr freundlich.</item>
        <item n="122 (233)."> Lobt Gott, ihr Christen allzugleich.</item>
        <item n="123 (234)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="124 (237)."> Mach's mit mir, Gott, nach deiner G&uuml;t.'</item>
        <item n="125 (240)."> Mein' Augen schliess' ich jetzt.</item>
        <item n="126 (241)."> Meinen Jesum lass' ich nicht, Jesus.</item>
        <item n="127 (242)."> Meinen Jesum lass' ich nicht, weil.</item>
        <item n="128 (248)."> Meines Lebens letzte Zeit.</item>
        <item n="129 (249)."> Mit Fried' und Freud' ich fahr' dahin.</item>
        <item n="130 (252)."> Mitten wir im Leben sind.</item>
        <item n="131 (253)."> Nicht so traurig, nicht so sehr (Bach's melody).</item>
        <item n="132 (254)."> Nun bitten wir den heiligen Geist.</item>
        <item n="133 (257)."> Nun danket Alle Gott.</item>
        <item n="134 (260)."> Nun freut euch, Gottes Kinder all.</item>
        <item n="135 (261)."> Nun freut euch, lieben Christen g'mein.</item>
        <item n="136 (269)."> Nun lob', mein' Seel', den Herren.</item>
        <item n="137 (270)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="138 (273)."> Nun preiset alle Gottes Barmherzigkeit.</item>
        <item n="139 (298)."> Nun ruhen alle W&auml;lder (0 Welt, ich muss dich lassen)</item>
        <item n="140 (289)."> 0 Welt, sieh' hier dein Leben (O Welt, ich muss dich lassen).</item>
        <item n="141 (290)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="142 (291)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="143 (274)."> Nun sich der Tag geendet hat.</item>
        <item n="144 (275)."> O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort.</item>
        <item n="145 (277)."> O Gott, du frommer Gott (1679 tune).</item>
        <item n="146(282)."> Ditto (1693 tune).</item>
        <item n="147 (284)."> O Herzensangst, O Bangigkeit und Zagen (Bach's melody).</item>
        <item n="148 (285)."> 0 Lamm Gottes, unschuldig.</item>
        <item n="149 (286)."> O Mensch, bewein' dein S&uuml;nde gross.</item>
        <item n="150 (287)."> 0 Mensch, schau' Jesum Christum an.</item>
        <item n="151 (288)."> 0 Traurigkeit, 0 Herzeleid.</item>
        <item n="152 (299)."> O wie selig seid ihr doch, ihr Frommen (1649).</item>
        <item n="153 (300)."> Ditto (1566).</item>
        <item n="154 (301)."> O wir armen S&uuml;nder.</item>
        <item n="155 (303)."> Schaut, ihr S&uuml;nder.</item>
        <item n="156(306)."> Seelenbr&auml;utigam, Jesu, Gottes Lamm.</item>
        <item n="157 (307)."> Sei gegr&uuml;sset, Jesu g&uuml;tig.</item>
        <item n="158 (309)."> Singt dem Herrn ein neues Lied.</item>
        <item n="159 (310)."> So giebst du nun, mein Jesu, gute Nacht.</item>
        <item n="160 (311)."> Sollt' ich meinem Gott nicht singen.</item>
        <item n="161 (313)."> Uns ist ein Kindlein heut' gebor'n.</item>
        <item n="162 (314)."> Valet will ich dir geben.</item>
        <item n="163 (316)."> Vater unser im Himmelreich.</item>
        <item n="164 (324)."> Von Gott will ich nicht lassen.</item>
        <item n="165 (325)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="166 (326)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="167 (331)."> Warum betr&uuml;bst du dich, mein Herz.</item>
        <item n="168 (332)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="169 (334)."> Warum sollt' ich mich denn gr&auml;men.</item>
        <item n="170 (336)."> Was betr&uuml;bst du dich, mein Herze (Bach's melody).</item>
        <item n="171 (337)."> Was bist du doch, 0 Seele, so betr&uuml;bet.</item>
        <item n="172 (349)."> Was willst du dich, 0 meine Seele.</item>
        <item n="173 (351)."> Weltlich Ehr' und zeitlich Gut.</item>
        <item n="174 (352)."> Wenn ich in Angst und Noth.</item>
        <item n="175 (353)."> Wenn mein St&uuml;ndlein vorhanden ist.</item>
        <item n="176 (354)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="177 (355)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="178 (358)."> Wenn wir in h&ouml;chsten N&ouml;then sein.</item>
        <item n="179 (359)."> Ditto.</item>
        <item n="180 (366)."> Wer Gott vertraut, hat wohlgebaut.</item>
        <item n="181 (367)."> Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten.</item>
        <item n="182 (374)."> Wie bist du, Seele, in mir so gar betr&uuml;bt.</item>
        <item n="183 (375)."> Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern.</item>
        <item n="184 (382)."> Wir glauben all' an einen Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer.</item>
        <item n="185 (389)."> Wo Gott zum Haus nicht gibt sein' Gunst.</item>
       </list>
       </item>

    <item n="(3)">Seventy-five Chorals harmonised by Bach:<note place="foot">
          <p>
The Chorals are taken from two sources, Anna Magdalena Bach's <q>Notenbuch</q> (1726; see B.G. XLIII. (2)), and Schemelli's <q>Musicalisches Gesang-Buch</q> (1736), of which Bach was the musical editor.  The latter contains sixty-nine melodies (with figured bass), the former seven: one melody (No. 14) is in both collections.  The Schemelli tunes are indicated by an S within a bracket after the numeral.  One melody (No. 71) is indubitably by Bach himself.  It, and others, which may be attributed to him on good evidence, are marked by an asterisk.  The seventy-five settings are published in practicable form by the N.B.G. I. (1) and I. (2).
          </p>
          </note>
       <list>
         <item n="*1"> (S). Ach, dass ich nicht die
letzte Stunde.</item>
         <item n="2 (S)."> Auf, auf! die rechte Zeit ist hier.</item>
         <item n="3 (S)."> Auf, auf! mein Herz, mit Freuden.</item>
         <item n="4 (S)."> Begl&uuml;ckter Stand getreuer Seelen.</item>
         <item n="*5 (S)."> Beschr&auml;nkt, ihr Weisen dieser Welt.</item>
         <item n="6 (S)."> Brich entzwei, mein armes Herze.</item>
         <item n="7 (S)."> Brunnquell aller G&uuml;ter.</item>
         <item n="8 (S)."> Der lieben Sonne Lacht und Pracht.</item>
         <item n="9 (S)."> Der Tag ist hin, die Sonne gehet nieder.</item>
         <item n="10 (S)."> Der Tag mit seinem Lichte.</item>
         <item n="*11 (S)."> Dich bet' ich an, mein h&ouml;chster Gott.</item>
         <item n="12 (S)."> Die bitt're Leidenszeit beginnet.</item>
         <item n="13 (S)."> Die gold'ne Sonne, voll Freud' und Wonne.</item>
         <item n="*14 (S)."> Dir, dir, Jehova, will ich singen.</item>
         <item n="*15 (S)."> Eins ist noth, ach Herr, dies Eine.</item>
         <item n="16 (S)."> Ermuntre dich, mein schwacher Geist.</item>
         <item n="17 (S)."> Erw&uuml;rgtes Lamm, das die verwahrten Siegel.</item>
         <item n="18 (S)."> Es gl&auml;nzet der Christen inwendiges Leben.</item>
         <item n="19 (S)."> Es ist nun aus mit meinem Leben.</item>
         <item n="20 (S)."> Es ist vollbracht! Vergiss ja nicht dies Wort.</item>
         <item n="21 (S)."> Es kostet viel, ein Christ zu sein.</item>
         <item n="*22."> Gieb dich zufrieden und sei stille (erste Composition).</item>
         <item n="*23."> Ditto. (zweite Composition).<note place="foot">
           <p>
           Nos. 22 and 23 are the same tune.
          </p>
          </note></item>
         <item n="24 (S)."> Ditto. (dritte Composition).</item>
         <item n="25 (S)."> Gott lebet noch! Seele, was verzagst du doch?</item>
         <item n="*26 (S)."> Gott, wie gross ist deine G&uuml;te.</item>
         <item n="27 (S)."> Herr, nicht schricke deine Rache.</item>
         <item n="*28 (S)."> Ich bin ja, Herr, in deiner Macht.</item>
         <item n="29 (S)."> Ich freue mich in dir.</item>
         <item n="*30 (S)."> Ich halte treulich still.</item>
         <item n="31 (S)."> Ich lass' dich nicht.</item>
         <item n="32 (S)."> Ich liebe Jesum alle Stund'.</item>
<pb n="255" />
         <item n="*33 (8)."> Ich steh' an deiner Krippen hier.</item>
         <item n="*34 (8)."> Jesu, Jesu, du bist mein.</item>
         <item n="35 (S)."> Jesu, deine Liebeswunden.</item>
         <item n="36 (8)."> Jesu, meines Glaubens Zier.</item>
         <item n="37 (8)."> Jesu, meines Herzens Freud'.</item>
         <item n="38 (8)."> Jesus ist das sch&ouml;nste Licht.</item>
         <item n="39 (8)."> Jesus, unser Trost und Leben.</item>
         <item n="40 (8)."> Ihr Gestirn', ihr hohlen L&uuml;fte.</item>
         <item n="41 (8)."> Kein St&uuml;ndlein geht dahin.</item>
         <item n="*42 (8)."> Komm, s&uuml;sser Tod, komm, sel'ge Ruh'!</item>
         <item n="*43 (8)."> Kommt, Seelen, dieser Tag.</item>
         <item n="*44 (8)."> Kommt wieder aus der finst'ren Gruft.</item>
         <item n="46 (8)."> Lasset uns mit Jesu ziehen.</item>
         <item n="46 (S)."> Liebes Herz, bedenke doch.</item>
         <item n="47 (8)."> Liebster Gott, wann werd' ioh sterben.</item>
         <item n="*48 (S)."> Liebeter Herr Jesu, wo bleibst du so lange.</item>
		 <item n="49 (S)."> Laebster Immanuel.</item>
		 <item n="60 (S)."> Mein Jesu, dem die Seraphinen.</item>
         <item n="*61 (S)."> Mein Jesu, was f&uuml;r Seelenweh.</item>
         <item n="62 (S)."> Meines Lebens letzte Zeit.</item>
         <item n="*63 (S)."> Nicht so traurig, nicht so sehr.</item>
         <item n="64 (S)."> Nur mein Jesus 1st mein Leben.</item>
		 <item n="66 (S)."> O du Liebe, meiner Liebe.</item>
         <item n="66.">O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort.</item>
         <item n="*67 (S)."> O finst're Nacht, wann wirst du doch vergehen.</item>
	     <item n="68 (S)."> O Jesulein s&uuml;ss, O Jesulein mild.</item>
         <item n="*69 (S)."> O liebe Seele, zieh' die Sinnen.</item>
		 <item n="60 (8)."> O wie selig seid ihr doch.</item>
         <item n="*61."> Schaffs mit mir, Gott, naoh deinem Willen.</item>
         <item n="62 (8)."> Seelenbr&auml;utigam, Jesu, Gottes Lamm.</item>
         <item n="63 (8)."> Seelenweide, meine Freude.</item>
         <item n="64 (S)."> Selig, wer an Jesum denkt.</item>
         <item n="66 (8)."> Sei gegr&uuml;sset, Jesu g&uuml;tig.</item>
         <item n="66 (8)."> So gehest du nun, mein Jesu, hin.</item>
         <item n="67 (8)."> So giebst du nun, mein Jesu, gute Nacht.</item>
         <item n="68 (8)."> So w&uuml;nsch' ich mir zu guter Letzt.</item>
         <item n="69 (S)."> Steh' ioh bei meinein Gott.</item>
         <item n="70 (8)."> Vergiss  mein  nioht,  date  ich  dein  nicht vergesse.</item>
<pb n="256" />
         <item n="*71 (S)."> Vergiss mein nicht, mein allerliebster Gott.</item>
         <item n="*72."> Warum betr&uuml;bst du dich und beugest. </item>
         <item n="73 (S)."> Was bist du doch, 0 Seele, so betr&uuml;bet.</item>
         <item n="*74."> Wie wohl ist mir, 0 Freund der Seelen.</item>
         <item n="75 (S)."> Wo ist mein Sch&auml;flein, das ich liebe.<note place="foot">
            <p>
For a discussion of Bach's original hymn-tunes see the present writer's <q>Bach's Chorals,</q> Part II. Introduction, pp. 67 ff. Six more of Bach's original hymn-tunes are printed there.
            </p>
            </note></item>
   </list>
</item>

<item n="(4)"> Five Arias from Anna Magdalena Bach's <q>Notenbuch</q> (1725)"<note place="foot">
<p>
The first three Arias are published by Novello, and also by the N.B.G. I. (1).
</p>
</note>
  <list>
    <item n="*1."> So oft ich meine Tabakspfeife.</item>
    <item n="*2."> Bist bu bei mir.</item>
    <item n="*3."> Gedenke doch, mein Geist, zur&uuml;cke.</item>
    <item n="4."> Gieb dich zufrieden und sei stille.</item>
    <item n="5."> Willst du dein Herz mir schenken (Aria di Giovannini).</item>
  </list>
</item>
</list>
</item>

<item n="XL."> 1890 [1893]. Orgelwerke. Vierter Band. Ed. Ernst Naumann.
  <list>
    <item n="(1)"> Choral Preludes, from Kirnberger's collection.<note place="foot">
<p>
In the Royal Library, Berlin.  Kirnberger was a pupil of Bach.  See section on Variants 
<foreign lang="la">infra.</foreign>
</p>
</note>
    <list>
      <item n="1."> Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten (N. bk. 19 p. 21).</item>
      <item n="2."> Ditto (N. bk. 19 p. 22).</item>
      <item n="3."> Ach Gott und Herr (N. bk. 18 p. 1).</item>
      <item n="4."> Ditto (N. bk. 18 p. 2).</item>
      <item n="5."> Wo soll ich fliehen hin (N. bk. 19 p. 32).</item>
      <item n="6."> Christ lag in Todesbanden (Fantasia) (N. bk. 18 p. 16).</item>
      <item n="7."> Christum wir sollen loben schon, <emph>or</emph>, Was f&uuml;rcht'st du, Feind Herodes, sehr (N. bk. 18 p. 23).</item>
      <item n="8."> Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ (Fughetta) (N. bk. 18 p. 38).</item>
      <item n="9."> Herr Christ, der ein'ge Gottes-Sohn (Fughetta) (N. bk. 18 p. 43).</item>
      <item n="10."> Nun komm der Heiden Heiland (Fughetta) (N.bk. 18 p. 83).</item>
      <item n="11."> Vom Himmel hoch da komm ich her (N. bk. 19 p. 16).</item>
      <item n="12."> Ditto. (Fughetta) (N. bk. 19 p. 14).</item>
      <item n="13."> Das Jesulein soll doch mein Trost (Fughetta) (N. bk. 18 p. 24).</item>
      <item n="14."> Gottes Sohn ist kommen (Fughetta) (N. bk. 18 p. 41).</item>
      <item n="15."> Lob sei dem allm&auml;chtigen Gott (Fughetta) (N. bk. 18 p. 73).</item>
      <item n="16."> Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt (N. bk. 18 p. 28).</item>
      <item n="17."> Liebster Jesu wir sind hier (N. bk. 18 p. 72a).</item>
      <item n="18."> Ditto. (N. bk. 18 p. 72b).</item>
      <item n="19."> Ich hab' mein' Sach' Gott hergestellt (N. bk. 18 p. 54)<note place="foot">
          <p>
           Novello omits the concluding four-part Choral.
          </p>
          </note></item>
      <item n="20."> Ditto. (N. bk. 18 p. 58a). </item>
      <item n="21."> Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend' (N. bk. 18 p. 50).</item>
      <item n="22."> Wir Christenleut' (N. bk. 19 p. 28b).<note place="foot">
           <p>
           The Prelude is also attributed to J. L. Krebs, a pupil of Bach. 
           </p>
           </note></item>
      <item n="23."> Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr (Bicinium) (N. bk. 18 p. 5).</item>
      <item n="24."> In dich hab' ich gehoffet, Herr (N. bk. 18 p. 59).</item>
      <item n="25."> Jesu, meine Freude (Fantasia) (N. bk. 18 p. 64).</item>
     </list>
    </item>

<item n="(2)"> Twenty-eight other Choral Preludes<note place="foot">
     <p>
     See section on Variants <foreign lang="la">infra.</foreign>:
     </p>
     </note>
     <list>
      <item n="1."> Ach Gott und Herr (Canon) (N. bk. 18 p. 3).</item>
      <item n="2."> Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr' (N. bk. 18 p. 4).</item>
      <item n="3."> Ditto. (Fuga) (N. bk. 18 p. 7).</item>
      <item n="4."> Ditto. (N. bk. 18 p. 11).</item>
      <item n="5."> An Wasserfl&uuml;ssen Babylon (N. bk. 18 p. 13).</item>
      <item n="6."> Christ lag in Todesbanden (N. bk. 18 p. 19).</item>
      <item n="7."> Der Tag der ist so freudenreich (N. bk. 18 p. 26).</item>
      <item n="8."> Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott (N. bk. 18 p. 30).</item>
      <item n="9."> Erbarm' dich mein, 0 Herre Gott (N. bk. 18 p. 35).</item>
      <item n="10."> Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ (N. bk. 18 p. 37).</item>
<pb n="258" />
      <item n="11."> Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ (N. bk. 18 p. 39).</item>
      <item n="12."> Gottes Sohn ist kommen (N. bk. 18 p. 42).</item>
      <item n="13."> Herr Gott, dich loben wir (N. bk. 18 p. 44).</item>
      <item n="14."> Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend' (N. bk. 18 p. 52).</item>
      <item n="15."> Herzlich thut mich verlangen (N. bk. 18 p. 53).</item>
      <item n="16."> Jesus, meine Zuversicht (N. bk. 18 p. 69).</item>
      <item n="17."> In dulci jubilo (N. bk. 18 p. 61).</item>
      <item n="18."> Liebster Jesu, wir sind hier (N. bk. 18 p. 70).</item>
      <item n="19."> Ditto. (N. bk. 18 p. 71).</item>
      <item n="20."> Lobt Gott, ihr Christen allzugleich (N. bk. 18 p. 74).</item>
      <item n="21."> Meine Seele erhebt den Herren (Magnificat) (Fuga) (N. bk. 18 p. 75).</item>
      <item n="22."> Nun freut euch, lieben Christen g'mein, <emph>or</emph>, Es ist gewisslich an der Zeit (N. bk. 18 p. 80).</item>
      <item n="23."> Valet will ich dir geben (Fantasia) (N. bk. 19 p. 2).</item>
      <item n="24."> Ditto. (N. bk. 19 p. 7).</item>
      <item n="25."> Vaterunser im Himmelreich (N. bk. 19 p. 12).</item>
      <item n="26."> Vom Himmel hoch da komm ich her (N. bk. 19 p. 19).</item>
      <item n="27."> Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern (N. bk. 19 p. 23).</item>
      <item n="28."> Wir glauben all' an einen Gott (N. bk. 19 p. 30).</item>
     </list>
    </item>

 <item n="(3)">Choral Variations:
    <list>
      <item n="1."> Christ, der du bist der helle Tag (N. bk. 19 p. 36).</item>
      <item n="2."> 0 Gott, du frommer Gott (N. bk. 19 p. 44).</item>
      <item n="3."> Sei gegr&uuml;sset, Jesu g&uuml;tig (N. bk. 19 p. 55).</item>
      <item n="4."> Vom Himmel hoch da komm ich her (N. bk. 19 p. 73).</item>
    </list>
   </item>

 <item n="(4)"> Variant texts and fragments:
  <list>
      <item n="1."> Variant of Kirnberger's No. 2 (P. bk. 244 p. 111).</item>
      <item n="2."> Variant of Kirnberger's No. 3 (not in N. or P.).</item>
      <item n="3."> Ich hab' mein' Sach' Gott heimgestellt (N. bk. 18 p. 58b). </item>
      <item n="4."> Variant of Kirnberger's No. 6 (P. bk. 245 p. 104).</item>
      <item n="5."> Variant of Kirnberger's No. 25 (P. bk. 245 p. 110).</item>
      <item n="6."> Variant of No. 10 of the Twenty-eight <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign> (not in N. or P.).</item>
<pb n="259" />
      <item n="7."> Variant of No. 17 (not in N. or P.).</item>
      <item n="8."> Variant of No. 20 (not in N. or P.).</item>
      <item n="9."> Variant of No. 26 (not in N. or P.).</item>
      <item n="10."> Variant of No. 22 (P. bk. 246 p. 91).</item>
      <item n="11."> Variant of No. 23 (P. bk. 246 p. 100).</item>
      <item n="12."> Jesu, meine Freude (fragment) (P. bk. 244 p. 112).</item>
      <item n="13."> Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern (fragment) (not in N. or P.).</item>
     </list>
    </item>

 <item n="(5)"> Choral Preludes and Variations of faulty text or doubtful authenticity:
   <list>
      <item n="1."> Ach Gott vom Himmel sieh' darein (P. bk. 2067 p.44).</item>
      <item n="2."> Auf meinen lieben Gott (P. bk. 2067 p. 39).</item>
      <item n="3."> Aus der Tiefe rufe ich (P. bk. 2067 p. 64).</item>
      <item n="4."> Christ ist erstanden (not in N. or P.).</item>
      <item n="5."> Christ lag in Todesbanden (P. bk. 2067 p. 56).</item>
      <item n="6."> Gott der Vater wohn' uns bei (P. bk. 245 p. 62) (by J. G. Walther).<note place="foot">
     <p>
     Variant, P. bk. 245 p. 106.
     </p>
     </note></item>
      <item n="7."> O Vater, allm&auml;chtiger Gott (not in N. or P.).</item>
      <item n="8."> Schm&uuml;cke dich, O liebe Seele (not in N. or P.) (also attributed to G. A. Homilius).</item>
      <item n="9."> Vater unser im Himmelreich (not in N. or P.) (also attributed to G. B&ouml;hm).</item>
      <item n="10."> Ditto.</item>
      <item n="11."> Wir glauben all' an einen Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer (P. bk. 2067 p. 40).<note place="foot">
   <p>
    Ernst Naumann remarks, <q>Das St&uuml;ck kann recht gut von Seb. Baoh herr&uuml;hren.</q> The text is complete, and the omission of the Prelude from the Novello edition is to be regretted.
   </p>
    </note></item>

      <item n="12."> Variations on Ach, was soll ich S&uuml;nder machen (not in N. or P.).</item>
      <item n="13."> Variations on Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr' (not in N. or P.).</item>
   </list>
  </item>

 <item n="(6)">Addendum to B.G. III.:
   <list>
    <item>Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr' (an early version of N. bk. 16 p. 40*) (P. bk. 245 p. 96).</item>
   </list>
  </item>
 </list>
</item>

<pb n="260" />

<item n="XLI."> 1891 [1894]. Kirchenmusikwerke. Erganzungsband. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;ffel.
  <list>
   <item>Cantata No. 191: Gloria in excelsis (the B minor Mass <q>Gloria</q>).</item>
   <item>Cantata No. 192: Nun danket Alle Gott (incomplete).</item>
   <item>Cantata No.193: Ihr Pforten zu Zion (incomplete).</item>
   <item>Ehre sei Gott in der Hone (incomplete).</item>
   <item>Wedding Cantata: O ewiges Feuer, O Ursprung der Liebe (incomplete).</item>
   <item>Wedding Cantata: Herr Gott, Beherrscher aller Dinge (incomplete).</item>
   <item>Sanctus in D major.</item>
   <item>Kyrie eleison (Christe, du Lamm Gottes).</item>
   <item>Christe eleison (Johann Ludwig Bach). </item>
   <item>Jesum lass' ich nicht von mir (the original concluding Choral of the first Part of the <q>St. Matthew Passion</q> (Breitkopf and Haertel's <q>Choralgesange,</q> No. 247).</item>
   <item>Four Cantatas of doubtful authenticity:
     <list>
      <item>Gedenke, Herr, wie es uns gehet.</item>
      <item>Gott der Hoffnung erfulle euch.</item>
      <item>Siehe, es hat iiberwunden der Lowe.</item>
      <item>Lobt ihn mit Herz und Munde.</item>
     </list>
    </item>
   </list>
</item>

<item n="XLII."> 1892 [1894]. Clavierwerke. Funfter Band. Ed. Ernst Naumann.
  <list>
    <item>Sonata in D minor (P. bk. 213 p. 24).<note place="foot">
        <p>
        A transcription of the second Sonata for Solo Violin, in A minor, See B.G. XXVII. (1).
        </p>
        </note></item>
    <item>Suite in E major (not in P.).<note place="foot">
        <p>
        A transcription of the third Partita, in E major, for Solo Violin. See <foreign lang="la">ibid.</foreign>
        </p>
        </note></item>
    <item>Adagio in G major (P. bk. 213 p. 1).<note place="foot">
        <p>
        From the third Sonata for Solo Violin, in C major. See <foreign lang="la">ibid.</foreign>
        </p>
        </note></item>
    <item>Sonata in A minor (P. bk. 213 p. 2).<note place="foot">
       <p>
       Both Sonatas are arrangements of instrumental Sonatas in J. A. Reinken's <q>Hortus Musicus.</q> See Spitta, i. 430.
       </p>
       </note></item>
    <item>Sonata in C major (P. bk. 213 p. 16).<note place="foot">
       <p>
       Both Sonatas are arrangements of instrumental Sonatas in J. A. Reinken's <q>Hortus Musicus.</q> See Spitta, i. 430.
       </p>
       </note></item>
    <item>Fugue in B flat major (P. bk. 1959 p. 75).<note place="foot">
       <p>
       After a Sonata movement by J. A. Reinken.
       </p>
       </note></item>
<pb n="261" />
    <item>Fugue in B flat major (P. bk. 1959 p. 90).<note place="foot">
       <p>
       After a Fugue by J. C. Erselius. The original is given in Anhang II. of the volume.
       </p>
       </note></item>

    <item>Sixteen Concertos after Antonio Vivaldi (P. bk. 217).<note place="foot">
       <p>
       Only Nos. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 14 are derived from Vivaldi. The others are founded on Benedetto Marcello (No. 3), Duke Johann Ernst of Weimar (Nos. 11, 16, and perhaps 13).
       </p>
       </note></item>

    <item>Fifteen Compositions of probable authenticity :
      <list>
        <item n="1."> Prelude and Fugue in A minor (P. bk. 1959 p. 84).</item>
        <item n="2."> Fantasia and Fugue in D minor (P. bk. 1959 p. 80).</item>
        <item n="3."> Fantasia in G minor (P. bk. 1959 p. 94).</item>
        <item n="4."> Concerto and Fugue in C minor (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="5."> Fugato in E minor (P. bk. 1959 p. 24).</item>
        <item n="6."> Fugue in E minor (P. bk. 1959 p. 72).</item>
        <item n="7."> Fugue in G major (P. bk. 1959 p. 68).</item>
        <item n="8."> Fugue in A minor (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="9."> Fugue in A minor (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="10."> Prelude in B minor (and Variant) (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="11."> Suite in B flat major (P. bk. 1959 p. 54).</item>
        <item n="12."> Andante in G minor (P. bk. 1959 p. 63).</item>
        <item n="13."> Scherzo in D minor (and Variant) (P. bk. 1959 p. 62).</item>
        <item n="14."> Sarabande con Partite in C major (P. bk. 1959 p. 26).</item>
        <item n="15."> Passacaglia in D minor (P. bk. 1959 p. 40).</item>
      </list>
     </item>

    <item>Ten Compositions of doubtful authenticity :
      <list>
        <item n="1."> Fantasia in C minor (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="2."> Toccata quasi Fantasia con Fuga in A major (not in P.).<note place="foot">
           <p>
           The Toccata is by Henry Purcell. See Grove, vol. iii. p. 857.
           </p>
           </note></item>
        <item n="3."> Partie in A major (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="4."> Allemande in C minor (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="5."> Gigue in F minor (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="6."> Allemande and Courante in A major (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="7."> Allemande in A minor (not in P.).</item>
        <item n="8."> Fantasia and Fughetta in B flat major (P. bk. 212 p. 58).</item>
        <item n="9."> Do. D major (P. bk. 212 p. 60).</item>
        <item n="10."> Fugue (unfinished) in E minor (not in P.).</item>
      </list>
     </item>

    <item>Concerto in G major by Antonio Vivaldi (original of the second Clavier Concerto <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>).<note place="foot">
         <p>
         The volume also contains a Variant of the first Organ Concerto (B.G. XXXVIII.).
         </p>
         </note> </item>
  </list>
</item>

<pb n="262" />

<item n="XLIII(l)."> 1893 [1894]. Kammermusik. Achter Band. Ed. Paul Graf Waldersee.
  <list>
   <item>Three Sonatas for Flute and Clavier:
    <list>
     <item>1. In C major (P. bk. 235 p. 33).</item>
     <item>2. In E minor (ib. p. 39).</item>
     <item>3. In E major (ib. p. 51).</item>
    </list>
    </item>
   <item>Sonata in E minor, for Violin and Clavier (P. bk. 236).</item>
   <item>Fugue in G minor for Violin and Clavier (P. bk. 236).</item>
   <item>Sonata in F major for two Claviers (by Wilhelm Friedemann Bach). </item>
   <item>Concerto in A minor for four Claviers and Orchestra (Strings) (P. bk. 260 p. 3).<note place="foot">
        <p>
        The Concerto is an arrangement of one by Antonio Vivaldi for four Violins, the original of which (in B minor) is given in the Appendix to the volume.
        </p>
        </note></item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XLIII (2)."> 1893 [1894]. Musikst&uuml;cke in den Notenb&uuml;chen der Anna Magdalena Bach. Ed. Paul Graf Waldersee.
  <list>
   <item n="(1)"> The Notebook of the year 1722 contains:
    <list>
     <item n="1."> The French Suites (incomplete) (see B.G. an. (2)).</item>
     <item n="2."> Fantasia in C major for the Organ (see B.G. XXXVIII. No. 25).</item>
     <item n="3."> Air (unfinished) in C minor (not in P.).</item>
     <item n="4."> Choral Prelude, ' Jesus, meine Zuversicht' (see B.G. XL. sec. 2 No. 16).</item>
     <item n="5."> Minuet in G major (see B.G. xxxvi. and P. bk. 215 p. 62).</item>
    </list>
    </item>

   <item n="(2)"> The Notebook of the year 1725 contains:<note place="foot">
     <p>
     Omitting the vocal numbers, movements printed elsewhere, and the <q>Menuet fait par Mons. B&ouml;hm,</q> Peters' Bk. 1959 contains the remaining twenty numbers of the Notebook. They are indicated in the above index by a P in a bracket.
      </p>
      </note>
     <list>
      <item n="1."> Partita III. (A minor) from the <q>Clavier&uuml;bung,</q> Part I. (see B.G. III.).</item>
      <item n="2."> Partita VI. (E minor) from the same (see B.G. III.).</item>
      <item n="3 (P)."> Minuet in F major.</item>
      <item n="4 (P)."> Minuet in G major.</item>
      <item n="5 (P)."> Minuet in G minor.</item>

<pb n="263" />

      <item n="6 (P)."> Rondeau in B flat major (by Couperin).</item>
      <item n="7 (P)."> Minuet in G major.</item>
      <item n="8 (P)."> Polonaise in F major (two versions).</item>
      <item n="9 (P)."> Minuet in B flat major.</item>
      <item n="10 (P)."> Polonaise in G minor.</item>
      <item n="11."> Choral Prelude, <q>Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst alten</q> (see B.G. XL., Kirnberger's Collection, no. 2).</item>
      <item n="12."> Choral, <q>Gieb dich zufrieden und sei stille</q> see B.G. XXXIX. see. 4 no. 4).</item>
      <item n="13."> Aria, <q>Gieb dich zufrieden un sei stille</q> (see B.G. XXXIX. sec. 2 no. 62).</item>
      <item n="14 (P)."> Minuet in A minor.</item>
      <item n="15 (P)."> Do. C minor.</item>
      <item n="16 (P)."> March in D major.</item>
      <item n="17 (P)."> Polonaise in G minor.</item>
      <item n="18 (P)."> March in A major.</item>
      <item n="19 (P)."> Polonaise in G minor.</item>
      <item n="20."> Aria, <q>So oft ich meine Tabakspfeife</q> (see B.G. XXXIX. sec. 4 no. 1).</item>
      <item n="21."> Minuet in G major, <q>fait par M&ouml;ns. B&ouml;hm.</q></item>
      <item n="22 (P)."> Musette in D major.</item>
      <item n="23 (P)."> March in E flat major.</item>
      <item n="24 (P)."> Polonaise in D minor.</item>
      <item n="25."> Aria, <q>Bist du bei mir</q> (see B.G. XXIX. sec. 4 no. 2).</item>
      <item n="26."> Aria in G major (the Aria of the Goldberg Variations. See B.G. III.).</item>
      <item n="27 (P)."> Solo per il Cembalo in E flat major.</item>
      <item n="28 (P)."> Polonaise in G major.</item>
      <item n="29."> Prelude in C major (Prelude i. of the first Part of the <q>Well-tempered Clavier.</q> See B.G. XIV.).</item>
      <item n="30."> Suite in D minor (the first of the French Suites. See B.G. XIII (2)).</item>
      <item n="31."> Suite in C minor (the first three movements of the second French Suite. See B.G. XIII (2)).</item>
      <item n="32."> Choral (wordless) in F. major.</item>

<pb n="264" />

      <item n="33."> Aria, <q>Warum betr&uuml;bst du dich</q> (see B.G. XXXIX. sec. 3 no. 72).</item>
      <item n="34."> Recitativo and Aria, <q>Ich habe genug,</q> and <q>Schlummert ein,</q> for Basso (from Cantata 82, nos. 2 and 3), transposed.</item>
      <item n="35."> Aria, <q>Schaff's mit mir, Gott, nach deinem Willen</q> (see B.G. xxxrx. sec. 3 no. 61).</item>
      <item n="36 (P)."> Minuet in D minor.</item>
      <item n="37."> Aria, <q>Willst du dein Herz mir schenken</q> (di Giovannini) (see B.G. XXXIX. sec. 4 no. 5).</item>
      <item n="38."> Aria, No. 34 <foreign lang="la">supra.</foreign> </item>
      <item n="39."> Choral, <q>Dir, dir Jehovah, will ich singen</q> (see B.G. XXXIX. sec. 2 no. 46).</item>
      <item n="40."> Aria, <q>Wie wohl ist mir, 0 Freund der Seelen</q> (see B.G. XXXIX. sec. 3 no. 74).</item>
      <item n="41."> Aria, <q>Gedenke doch, mein Geist, zurticke</q> (see B.G. XXXIX. sec. 4 no. 3).</item>
      <item n="42."> Choral, <q>O Ewigkeit, du Donnerwort</q> (see B.G. XXXIX. sec. 2 no. 144).</item>
     </list>
	</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XLIV."> 1894 [1895]. Handschrift in zeitlich geordneten Nachbildungen. Ed. Hermann Kretzschmar. Contains facsimiles of Bach's handwriting and autograph MSS.
</item>

<item n="XLV(1)."> 1895 [1897]. Clavierwerke. Zweiter Band (neue berichtigte Ausgabe). Ed. Alfred D&ouml;ffel.<note place="foot">
     <p>
     A separate Preface to the reprinted Suites is by Ernst Naumann. It is dated 1895.
     </p>
     </note>
  <list>
    <item>The Six English Suites (see B.G. XIII. (2)). (P. bks. 2794, 2795.)</item>
    <item>The Six French Suites (see B.G. XIII. (2)). (P. bk. 2793.)</item>
    <item>Five Canons in 4, 6, 7, 8 parts.</item>
    <item>Prelude and Fugue in E flat major (P. bk. 214 p. 40).</item>
    <item>Suite in E minor (P. bk. 214 p. 68).</item>
    <item>Suite in C minor (not in P.).</item>
    <item>Sonata (first movement) in A minor (not in P.).<note place="foot">
      <p>Perhaps an arrangement of an orchestral piece. See Schweitzer, i. 342 n.
      </p>
      </note></item>

<pb n="265" />

    <item>Four Inventions, in B minor, B flat major, C minor, D major, for Violin and Clavier (P. bk. 2957).</item>
    <item>Overture in G minor for Strings and Clavier (not in P.).</item>
    <item>The <q>Clavier-B&uuml;chlein</q> of Wilhelm Friedemann Bach contains:
  <list>
    <item n="1."> Applicatio in C major (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 48).</item>
    <item n="2."> Prelude in C major (the first of the Twelve Little Preludes) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 19).</item>
    <item n="3."> Choral Prelude, <q>Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten</q> (see B.G. XL., Kirnberger's Collection, no. 2).</item>
    <item n="4."> Prelude in D minor (the fifth of the Little Preludes) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 19).</item>
    <item n="5."> Choral Prelude, <q>Jesu meine Freude</q> (fragment) (see B.G. XL. sec 4 no. 12).</item>
    <item n="6."> Allemande in G minor (not in P.).</item>
    <item n="7."> Allemande (fragment) in G minor (not in P.).</item>
    <item n="8."> Prelude in F major (the eighth of the Little Preludes) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 19).</item>
    <item n="9."> Prelude in G minor (the eleventh of the Little Preludes) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 19).</item>
    <item n="10."> Prelude in F major (the ninth of the Little Preludes) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 19).</item>
    <item n="11."> Minuet in G major (the first of the three Minuets) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 43).</item>
    <item n="12."> Minuet in G minor (the second of the three Minuets) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 43).</item>
    <item n="13."> Minuet in G major (the third of the three Minuets) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 43).</item>
    <item n="14."> Prelude in C major (the first Prelude of the first Part of the <q>Well-tempered Clavier.</q> See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="15."> Do. C minor (the second Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="16."> Do. D minor (the sixth Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="17."> Do. D major (the fifth Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>

<pb n="266" />

    <item n="18."> Prelude in E minor (the tenth Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="19."> Prelude in E major (the ninth Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="20."> Prelude in F major (the eleventh Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="21."> Prelude in C sharp major (the third Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="22."> Prelude in C sharp minor (the fourth Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="23."> Prelude in E flat minor (the eighth Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.).</item>
    <item n="24."> Prelude in F minor (the twelfth Prelude of the first Part of the same. See B.G. XIV.)</item>
    <item n="25."> Allemande and Courante in C major, by J. C. Richter.</item>
    <item n="26."> Prelude in C major (first of the Little Preludes. See B.G. XXXVI. no. 19).</item>
    <item n="27."> Prelude in D major (fourth of the Little Preludes. See B.G. XXXVI. no. 19).</item>
    <item n="28."> Prelude in E minor (see B.G. xxxvi. no. 50).</item>
    <item n="29."> Prelude in A minor (B.G. xxxvi. no. 49).</item>
    <item n="30."> Prelude in G minor (not in P.).</item>
    <item n="31."> Fugue in C major (see B.G. xxxvi. no. 38).</item>
    <item n="32."> Prelude in C major (Invention i. See B.G. m.).</item>
    <item n="33."> Prelude in D minor (Invention iv. See B.G. m.).</item>
    <item n="34."> Prelude in E minor (Invention vii. See B.G. m.).</item>
    <item n="35."> Prelude in F major (Invention viii. See B.G. m.).</item>
    <item n="36."> Prelude in G major (Invention x. See B.G. in.).</item>
    <item n="37."> Prelude in A minor (Invention xiii. See B.G. m.).</item>
    <item n="38."> Prelude in B minor (Invention xv. See B.G. m.).</item>
    <item n="39."> Prelude in B flat major (Invention xiv. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="40."> Prelude in A major (Invention xii. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="41."> Prelude in G minor (Invention xi. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="42."> Prelude in F minor (Invention ix. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="43."> Prelude in E major (Invention vi. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="44."> Prelude in E flat major (Invention v. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="45."> Prelude in D major (Invention iii. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="46."> Prelude in C minor (Invention ii. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="47."> Suite in A major (fragment) (see B.G. XXXVI. no. 45).</item>
    <item n="48."> Partita in G minor by Steltzel, including a Minuet Trio by J. S. B. (Minuet in P. bk. 1959 p. 8).</item>
    <item n="49."> Fantasia in C major (Sinfonia i. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="50."> Fantasia inD minor (Sinfonia iv. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="51."> Fantasia in E minor (Sinfonia vii. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="52."> Fantasia in F major (Sinfonia viii. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="53."> Fantasia in G major (Sinfonia x. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="54."> Fantasia in A minor (Sinfonia xiii. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="55."> Fantasia in B minor (Sinfonia xv. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="56."> Fantasia in B flat major (Sinfonia xiv. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="57."> Fantasia in A major (Sinfonia xii. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="58."> Fantasia in G minor (Sinfonia xi. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="59."> Fantasia in F minor (Sinfonia ix. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="60."> Fantasia in E major (Sinfonia vi. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="61."> Fantasia in E flat major (Sinfonia v. See B.G. III.).</item>
    <item n="62."> Fantasia in D major (Sinfonia iii. See B.G. III.).<note place="foot">
         <p>
         The Appendix to the volume contains addenda to the Violin Concerto in A minor (see B.G. XXL. (1)) and Cantata 188 (see B.G. XXXVII.). Also the Zurich and London texts of the <q>Welltempered Clavier</q> (B.G. XIV.), with critical notes.
         </p>
         </note></item>
    </list>
	</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n ="XLV (2)."> 1895 [1898]. Passionsmusik nach dem Evangelisten Lucas. Ed. Alfred D&ouml;ffel.
 <p>
 Though the Score is in Bach's autograph, the work is generally held not to be his. 
 </p>
</item>

<item n="XLVI."> 1896 [1899].<note place="foot">
<p>
The Preface is dated 1899. The volume was issued in 1900.
</p>
</note> Schlussband. Bericht und Verzeichnisse. Ed. Hermann Kretzschmar.
 <p>
 The volume contains:&mdash;
 </p>
 <list>
  <item>Historical retrospect of the Society and its activities.</item>
  <item>Thematic Index to Cantatas 121-191 (see B.G. XXVII (2)), unfinished Cantatas, Cantatas of doubtful authenticity, Christmas Oratorio, Easter Oratorio, St. Matthew Passion, St. John Passion, St. Luke Passion, Mass in B minor, the four Masses in F major, A major, G minor, G major, the four Sanctus in C major, D major, D minor, G major, Magnificat in D major, the <q>Trauer-Ode</q> Wedding Cantatas and Chorals, Motets, Secular Cantatas (P. bk. 270b).</item>
  <item>Alphabetical Index of the movements throughout the vocal works.</item>
  <item>Thematic Index to the Clavier music.</item>
  <item>Thematic Index to the Chamber music.</item>
  <item>Thematic Index to the Orchestral music.</item>
  <item>Thematic Index to the Organ music.</item>
  <item>Thematic Index to the <q>Musikalisches Opfer</q>.</item>
  <item>Thematic Index to the <q>Kunst der Fuge</q></item>
   <item>Index to the several movements throughout the instrumental works.</item>
  <item>Index of names and places occurring in the Prefaces of the B.G. volumes.</item>
  <item>Bach's vocal and instrumental works arranged (1) in the order of the yearly volumes, (2) in groups.</item>
 </list>
</item>

</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">(B) PUBLICATIONS OF THE NEW BACHGESELLSCHAFT</head>
<list>
 <item n="1(1)."> 1901. Lieder und Arien. Fur eine Singstimme mit Pianoforte (Orgel oder Harmonium). Ed. Ernst Naumann
  <p>
  The seventy-eight Songs are those contained in B.G. XXXIX. secs. 3 and 4 (first three only) <foreign lang="la">supra.</foreign>
  </p>
  </item>
 <item n="I (2)."> 1901. Lieder und Arien. Furvierstimmigen gemischten Chor. Ed. Franz W&uuml;llner.
  <p>
  The seventy-five Songs are those contained in I (1), omitting those in sec. 4 of B.G. XXXIX. <foreign lang="la">supra.</foreign>
  </p>
  </item>

 <item n="1(3)."> 1901. Erstes deutsches Bach-Fest in Berlin 21 bis 23 Marz 1901. Festschrift.
  <p>
  The frontispiece is Carl Seffner's bust of Bach.
  </p>
  </item>

 <item n="II (1)."> 1902. Orgelb&uuml;chlein. 46 k&uuml;rzere Choralbearbeitungen f&uuml;r Klavier zu vier Handen. Ed. Bernhard Fr. Richter.
  <p>
  The original forty-six Organ Preludes, here arranged for two pianofortes (see B.G. XXV (2), sec. 1).
  </p>
  </item>

 <item n="II(2)."> 1902. Kirchen-Kantaten. Klavierauszug. Erstes Heft. Ed. Gustav Schreck and Ernst Naumann.
  <p>
  Contains Breitkopf and Haertel's vocal scores of&mdash;
  </p>
  <list>
    <item>Cantata 61: Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland.</item>
    <item>Cantata 64: Sehet, welch' eine Liebe.</item>
    <item>Cantata 28: Gottlob! nun geht das Jahr zu Ende.</item>
    <item>Cantata 65: Sie werden aus Saba Alle kommen.</item>
    <item>Cantata 4: Christ lag in Todesbanden.</item>
   </list>
  </item>

<item n="III (1)."> 1903. Kirchen-Kantaten. Klavierauszug. Zweites Heft. Ed. Ernst Naumann.
 <p>
 Contains Breitkopf and Haertel's vocal scores of&mdash;
 </p>
 <list>
    <item>Cantata 104: Du Hirte Israel, h&ouml;re. </item>
    <item>Cantata 11: Lobet Gott in seinen Reichen. </item>
    <item>Cantata 34: O ewiges Feuer. </item>
    <item>Cantata 45: Es ist dir gesagt. </item>
    <item>Cantata 80: Bin' feste Burg.</item>
 </list>
 </item> 

<item n="III(2)."> 1903. Drei Sonaten f&uuml;r Klavier und Violine. Ed. Ernst Naumann.
 <list>
  <item>Sonata I. in B minor.</item>
  <item>Sonata II. in A major. (See B.G. IX.) </item>
  <item>Sonata III. in E major.) </item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="IV (1)."> 1904. Drei Sonaten f&uuml;r Klavier und Violine. Ed. Ernst Naumann.
  <list>
   <item>Sonata IV. in C minor.</item>
   <item>Sonata V. in F minor (See BG. IX)</item>
   <item>Sonata VI. in G major.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="IV (2)."> 1904. Joh. Seb. Bach, Bildnis in Heliogravure.
 <p>
 A print of the portrait discovered by Dr. Fritz Volbach reproduced at p. 92 of this present volume.
 </p>
 </item>

<item n="IV (3)."> 1904. Zweites deutsches Bach-Fest in Leipzig 1 bis 3 Oktober 1904. Festschrift.</item>

<item n="V (1)."> 1905. Fest-Gottesdienst zum deutschen Bachfeste in der Thomaskirche zu Leipzig. Ed. Georg Rietschel.
 <p>
  Contains the order of service and music sung on the occasion.
 </p>
</item>

<item n="V (2)."> 1905. Ausgewahlte Arien und Duette mit einem obligaten Instrument und Klavier- oder Orgelbegleitung.
  <p>
  I Abteilung: Arien f&uuml;r Sopran Ed. Eusebius Mandyczewski.
  </p>
  <list>
   <item n="1."> Auch mit ged&auml;mpften schwachen Stimmen (Cantata 36: Violin).</item>
   <item n="2."> Die Armen will der Herr unarmen (Cantata 186: Violin).</item>
   <item n="3."> Es halt' es mit der blinden Welt (Cantata 94: Oboe d'amore).</item>
   <item n="4."> Gerechter Gott, ach, rechnest du (Cantata 89 : Oboe).</item>
   <item n="5."> Gott versorget alles Leben (Cantata 187 : Oboe).</item>
   <item n="6."> Hochster, was ich habe, ist nur deine Gabe (Cantata 39: Flauto).</item>
   <item n="7."> H&ouml;rt, ihr Augen, auf zu weinen (Cantata 98 : Oboe).</item>
   <item n="8."> Ich bin vergn&uuml;gt in meinem Leiden (Cantata 58: Violin).</item>
   <item n="9."> Ich ende behende mein irdisches Leben (Cantata 57: Violin).</item>
   <item n="10."> Ich nehme mein Leiden mit Freuden auf mich (Cantata 75: Oboe d'amore).</item>
   <item n="11."> Ich will auf den Herren schau'n (Cantata 93: Oboe).</item>
   <item n="12."> Seufzer, Thranen, Kummer, Noth (Cantata 21 : Oboe).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<pb n="271" />

<item n="V(3)."> 1905. Bach-Jahrbuch 1904. Herausgegeben von der Neuen Bachgesellschaft.
<p>
In addition to sermons and addresses on the occasion of the second Bach Festival at Leipzig in 1904, the volume contains the following articles:
</p>
  <list>
   <item n="1."> Bach und der evangelische Gottesdienst. By Karl Greulich.</item>
   <item n="2."> Praktische Bearbeitungen Bachscher Kompositionen. By Max Seiffert.</item>
   <item n="3."> Bachs Rezitativbehandlung mit besonderer Ber&uuml;ck sichtigung der Passionen. By Alfred Heuss.</item>
   <item n="4."> Verschwundene Traditionen des Bachzeit alters. By Arnold Schering.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="VI (1)."> 1906. Ausgewahlte Arien und Duette mit einem obligaten Instrument und Klavier- oder Orgelbegleitung. II Abteilung: Arien f&uuml;r Alt. Ed. Eusebius Mandyczewski.
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Ach, bleibe doch, mein liebstes Leben (Cantata 11: Violin).</item>
  <item n="2."> Ach, es bleibt in meiner Liebe (Cantata 77: Tromba).</item>
  <item n="3."> Ach Herr! was ist ein Menschenkind (Cantata 110: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="4."> Ach, unaussprechlich ist die Noth (Cantata 116: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="5."> Christen m&uuml;ssen auf der Erden (Cantata 44: Oboe).</item>
  <item n="6."> Christi Glieder, ach, bedenket (Cantata 132: Violin).</item>
  <item n="7."> Es kommt ein Tag (Cantata 136: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="8."> Gelobet sei der Herr, mein Gott (Cantata 129: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="9."> Ich will doch wohl Rosen brechen (Cantata 86: Violin).</item>
  <item n="10."> Jesus macht mich geistlich reich (Cantata 75: Violin).</item>
  <item n="11."> Kein Arzt ist ausser dir zu finden (Cantata 103: Flauto).</item>
  <item n="12."> Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan (Cantata 100: Oboe d'amore).</item>
 </list>
</item>

<pb n="272" />

<item n="VI (2)."> 1906. Ausgewahlte Arien und Duette mit einem obligaten Instrument und Klavier- odor Orgelbegleitung. III Abteilung: Duette f&uuml;r Sopran und Alt. Ed. Eusebius Mandyczewski.
  <list>
  <item n="1."> Die Armuth, so Gott auf sich nimmt (Cantata 91: Violin).</item>
  <item n="2."> Wenn Sorgen auf mich dringen (Cantata 3: Violin or Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="3."> Er kennt die rechten Freudenstunden (Cantata 93: Violin).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="VI (3)."> 1906. Bach-Jahrbuch 1905. Herausgegeben von der Neuen Bachgesellschaft.
 <p>
 Contains the following articles:
 </p>
 <list>
  <item n="1.">Johann Sebastian Bachs Kapelle zu C&ouml;then und deren nachgelassene Instrumente. By Rudolf Bunge.</item>
  <item n="2."> Geleitwort. By Arnold Sobering.</item>
  <item n="3."> Die Wahl Joh. Seb. Bachs zum Kantor der Thomaschule i. J. 1723. By Bernhard Fr. Richter.</item>
  <item n="4."> Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott. Kantata von Joh. Seb. Bach. By Fritz Volbach.</item>
  <item n="5."> Verzeichnis der bisher erschienenen Literatur &uuml;ber Johann Sebastian Bach. By Max Schneider.</item>
  <item n="6."> Reviews of books.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="VII (1)."> 1907. Kantate No. 88: <q>Siehe, ich will viel Fischer aussenden.</q> Partitur. Ed. Max Seiffert.
</item>

<item n="VII (2)."> 1907. Kantate No. 88: <q>Siehe, ich will viel Fischer aussenden.</q> Klavierauszug mit Text. Ed. Max Seiffert und Otto Taubmann.
</item>

<item n="VII (3)."> 1907. Bach-Jahrbuch 1906. Herausgegeben von der Neuen Bachgesellschaft.
 <p>
 Contains the following articles:
 </p>
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Erfahrungen und Ratschl&uuml;ger bez&uuml;glich der Auff&uuml;hrung Bachscher Kirchenkantaten. By Wilhelm Voigt.</item>
<pb n="273" />
  <item n="2."> &Uuml;ber die Schickssle der der Thomasschule zu Leipzig angehorenden Kantaten Joh. Seb. Bachs. By Bernhard Fr. Richter.</item>
  <item n="3."> Die grosse A-moll Fuge f&uuml;r Orgel [Novello bk. 7 p. 42] und ihre Vorlage. By Reinhardt Oppel.</item>
  <item n="4."> Zur Rritik der Gesamtausgabe von Bachs Werken. By Max Seiffert.</item>
  <item n="5."> Verzeichnis der bis zum Jahre 1851 gedruckten (und der geschrieben im Handel gewesenen) Werke von Johann Sebastian Bach. By Max Schneider.</item>
  <item n="6."> &Uuml;bersicht der Auff&uuml;hrungen J. S. Bachscher Werke von Ende 1904 bis Anfang 1907.</item>
  <item n="8."> Notes.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="VII (4)."> 1907. Drittes deutsches Bach-Fest zur Einweihung von Johann Sebastian Bachs Geburtshaus als BachMuseum [at Eisenach]. Fest- und Programmbuch [26-28 May 1907].
 <p>
 The frontispiece is Carl Seffner's bust of Bach.
 </p>
</item>

<item n="VIII (1)."> 1908. Violinkonzert No. 2 in E dur. Partitur. Ed. Max Seiffert.
 <p>
 See B.G. XXI (1) no. 2.
 </p>
</item>

<item n="VIII (2)."> 1908. Violinkonzert No. 2 in E dur fur Violine und Klavier. Ed. Max Seiffert and A. Saran.
</item>

<item n="VIII (3)."> 1908. Bach-Jahrbuch. 4 Jahrgang 1907: Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Schering.
 <p>
 In addition to a sermon by Professor Georg Rietschel and an obituary notice of Joseph Joachim, the volume contains the following articles:
 </p>
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Sebastian Bach und Paul Gerhardt. By Wilhelm Nolle.</item>
  <item n="2."> Stadtpfeifer und Alumnen der Thomasschule in Leipzig zu Bachs Zeit. By Bernhard Fr. Richter.</item>

<pb n="274" />

  <item n="3."> Angeblich von J. S. Bach komponierte Oden von Chr. H. Hoffmannswaldau. By &mdash;. Landmann.</item>
  <item n="4."> Die neuen deutschen Ausgaben der zwei- und dreistimmigen Inventionen [Peters bk. 2792]. By Reinhardt Oppel.</item>
  <item n="5."> Thematisches Verzeichnis der musikalischen Werke der Familie Bach. I. Theil. By Max Schneider.</item>
  <item n="6."> Notes and Reviews of books.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="IX (1)."> 1909. Kantate No. 85: <q>Ich bin ein guter Hirt.</q> Partitur. Ed. Max Seiffert.
</item>

<item n="IX (2)."> 1909. Kantate No. 85: <q>Ich bin ein guter Hirt.</q> Klavierauszug mit Text. Ed. Max Seiffert and Max Schneider.
</item>

<item n="IX (3)."> 1909. Brandenburgisches Konzert No. 3. Partitur. Ed. Max Seiffert.
  <p>
  See B.G. XIX. no. 3.
  </p>
</item>

<item n="IX (4)."> 1909. Brandcnburgisches Konzert No. 3 f&uuml;r Klavier zu vier H&auml;nden. Ed. Max Seiffert and Max Schneider.
</item>

<item n="IX (5)."> 1909. Viertes deutsches Bach-Fest in Chemnitz 3-5 Oktober 1908. Fest- und Programmbuch.
  <p>
  The frontispiece is a photograph of Carl Seffner's statue of Bach, unveiled at Leipzig May 17, 1908.
  </p>
</item>

<item n="IX (6)."> 1909. Bach-Jahrbuch. 5 Jahrgang 1908: Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Schering.
  <p>
  Contains the following articles:
  </p>
  <list>
  <item n="1."> Zu Bachs Weihnachtsoratorium, Theil 1 bis 3. By Woldemar Voigt.</item>
  <item n="2."> &Uuml;ber Seb. Bachs Kantaten mit obligater Pedal. By Bernhard Fr. Richter.</item>
  <item n="3."> Cembalo oder Pianoforte? By Richard Buchmayer.</item>
  <item n="4."> Bearbeitung Bachscher Kantaten. By Max Schneider.</item>

<pb n="275" />

  <item n="5."> Nachrichten &uuml;ber das Leben Georg B&ouml;hms mit spezieller Ber&uuml;cksichtigung seiner Beziehungen zur Bachschen Familie. By Richard Buchmayer.</item>
  <item n="6."> Ein interessantes Beispiel Bachscher Textauffassung. By Alfred Heuss.</item>
  <item n="7."> Edgar Tinel &uuml;ber Seb. Bach.</item>
  <item n="8."> Notes.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="X (I)."> 1910. Ausgewahlte Arien und Duette mit einem obligaten Instrument und Klavier- oder Orgelbegleitung. IV Abteilung: Arien f&uuml;r Tenor. Ed. Eusebius Mandyczewski.
  <list>
   <item n="1."> Dein Blut, so meine Schuld durchstreit (Cantata 78: Flauto).</item>
   <item n="2."> Die Liebe zieht mit sanften Schritten (Cantata 36: Oboe d'amore).</item>
   <item n="3."> Ergiesse dich reichlich, du gottliche Quelle (Cantata 5: Viola).</item>
   <item n="4."> Handle nicht nach deiuen Bechten mit uns (Cantata 101: Violin).</item>
   <item n="5."> Ich will an den Himmel denken (Cantata 166 : Oboe).</item>
   <item n="6."> Ja, tausendmal Tausend (Cantata 43 : Violin).</item>
   <item n="7."> Mich kann kein Zweifel st&ouml;ren (Cantata 108 : Violin).</item>
   <item n="8."> Seht, was die Liebe thut! (Cantata 85 : Violin or Viola).</item>
   <item n="9."> Tausendfaches Ungl&uuml;ck, Schrecken, Tr&uuml;bsal (Cantata 143: Violin).</item>
   <item n="10."> Wir waren schon zu tief gesunken (Cantata 9 : Violin).</item>
   <item n="11."> Woferne du den edlen Frieden (Cantata 41 : Violoncello).</item>
   <item n="12."> Wo wird in diesem Jammerthale (Cantata 114: Flauto).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="X (2)."> 1910. Brandenburgisches Konzert No. 1. Partitur. Ed. Max Seiffert.
  <p>
  See B.G. XIX. no. 1.
  </p>
</item>

<item n="X(3)."> 1910. Brandenburgisches Konzert No. 1 fur Klavier zu vier Handen. Ed. Max Seiffert and Max Schneider.
</item>

<item n="X(4)."> 1910. Bach-Jahrbuch. 6 Jahrgang 1909: Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Schering.
 <p>
 The volume contains the following articles:
 </p>
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Zum Linearprinzip J. S. Bachs. By Robert Handke.</item>
  <item n="2."> Bachs Verh&auml;ltnis zur Klaviermusik. By Karl Nes.</item>
  <item n="3."> Zur Tenorarie [<q>Ich will an den Himmel denken</q>: See X (1) no. 5, <foreign lang="la">supra</foreign>] der Kantate 166. By Reinhard Oppel.</item>
  <item n="4."> Die Verzierungen in den Werken von J. S. Bach. By E. Dannreuther.</item>
  <item n="5."> Konnte Bachs Gemeinde bei seinen einfachen Choral-s&auml;tzen mitsingen? By Rudolf Wustmann.</item>
  <item n="6."> Buxtehudes musikalischer Nachrnf heim Tode seines Vaters (mit einer Notenbeilage). By Reinhard Oppel. </item>
  <item n="7."> <q>Matthauspassion,</q> erster Theil. By Rudolf Wustmann.</item>
  <item n="8."> Zu den Beschl&uuml;ssen des Dessauer Kirchengesangver einstages. By Arnold Schering.</item>
  <item n="9."> Notes.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="X (5)."> 1910. F&uuml;nftes deutsches Bach-Fest in Duisburg 4 bis
7 Juni 1910. Fest- und Programmbuch.
  <p>
  Frontispiece, St. Thomas' Church and School, Leipzig, in 1723. Reproduced at p. 28 of the present volume.
  </p>
</item>

<item n="XI (1)."> 1911. Ausgewahlte Arien und Duetto mit einem obligaten Instrument und Klavier- oder Orgelbegleitung V Abteilung: Arien f&uuml;r Bass, Ed. Eusebius Mandyczewski.
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Achzen und erb&auml;rmlich Weinen (Cantata 13: Violin or Flute).</item>

<pb n="277" />

  <item n="2."> Die Welt mit allen K&ouml;nigreichen (Cantata 59: Violin).</item>
  <item n="3."> Endlicb, endlich wird niein Joch (Cantata 56: Oboe).</item>
  <item n="4."> Erleucht' auch meine finstre Sinnen (<q>Christmas
Oratorio,</q> Part V. no. 5: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="5."> Gleichwie die wilden Meeres-Wellen (Cantata 178: Violin or Viola).</item>
  <item n="6."> Greifet zu, fasst das Heil (Cantata 174: Violin or Viola).</item>
  <item n="7."> Herr, nun l&auml;ssest du deinen Diener (Cantata 83: Violin or Viola).</item>
  <item n="8."> Hier, in meines Vatera St&auml;tte (Cantata 32: Violin).</item>
  <item n="9."> Komm, s&uuml;sses Kreuz (<q>St. Matthew Passion,</q> no. 57: Violoncello).</item>
  <item n="10."> Lass', O Welt, mich aus Verachtung (Cantata 123: Flauto).</item>
  <item n="11."> Tritt auf die Glaubensbahn (Cantata 152: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="12."> Wenn Trost und H&uuml;lf' ermangeln muss (Cantata 117: Violin).</item>
 </list>
</item>


<item n="XI (2)."> 1911. Bach-Jahrbuch. 7 Jahrgang 1910: Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Sobering.
<p>
The volume contains the following articles:
</p>
  <list>
   <item n="1.">Die Diatonik in ihrem Einfluss auf die thematische Gestaltung des Fugenbaues. By Robert Handke.</item>
   <item n="2.">Bach und die franzosische Klaviermusik. By Wanda Landowska.</item>
   <item n="3.">Sebastian Bachs Kirchenkantatentexte. By Rudolf Wustmann.</item>
   <item n="4.">Uber Joh. Kasp. Fred. Fischers Einfluss auf Joh. Seb. Bach. By Reinhard Oppel.</item>
   <item n="5.">Hans Bach, der Spielmann. By Werner Wolffheim.</item>
   <item n="6.">Vom Rhythmus des evangelischen Chorals. By Rudolf Wustmann.</item>
   <item n="7.">W. Friedemann Bach und seine hallische Wirksamkeit. By C. Zehler.</item>
<pb n="278" />
   <item n="8.">Neues Material zum Verzeichnis der bisher erschienenen Literatur &uuml;ber Johann Sebastian Bach. By Max Schneider. </item>
   <item n="9.">Reviews of books.</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XII (1)."> 1912. Ausgewahlte Arien und Duette mit einem obligaten Instrument und Klavier- oder Orgelbegleitnng. VI Abteilung: Arien fur Sopran. 2 Heft. Ed. Eusebius Mandyczewski.
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Bereite dir, Jesu, noch itzo die Bahn (Cantata 147: Violin).</item>
  <item n="2."> Eilt, ihr Stunden, kommt herbei (Cantata 30: Violin).</item>
  <item n="3."> Erf&uuml;llet, ihr bimmlischen, g&ouml;ttlichen Flammen (Cantata 1: Oboe da caccia).</item>
  <item n="4."> Gen&uuml;gsamkeit ist ein Schatz in diesem Leben (Cantata 144: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="5."> H&ouml;rt, ihr V&ouml;lker, Gottes Stimme (Cantata 76: Violin).</item>
  <item n="6."> Ich folge dir gleichfalls (<q>St. John Passion,</q> no. 9: Flauto).</item>
  <item n="7."> Jesus soll mein erstes Wort (Cantata 171: Violin).</item>
  <item n="8."> Liebster Jesu, mein Verlangen (Cantata 32: Oboe).</item>
  <item n="9."> Meinem Hirten bleib' ich treu (Cantata 92: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="10."> Seele, deine Spezereien sollen nicht (<q>Easter Oratorio,</q> no. 4: Flauto or Violin).</item>
  <item n="11."> Was Gott thut, das ist wohlgethan (Cantata 100: Flauto).</item>
  <item n="12."> Wie zittern und wanken der S&uuml;nder Gedanken (Cantata 105: Oboe).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item n="XII (2)."> 1912. Bach-Jahrbuch. 8 Jaargang 1911: Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Schering. Mit 2 Bildnissen und 8 Faksimiles.
<p>
The volume contains the following articles:
</p>
  <list>
   <item n="1."> <q>Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut</q> [see infra XIII (2)]. By Werner Wolffheim.</item>
<pb n="279" />
   <item n="2."> Das sogensante Orgelkonzert D-moll, von Wilhelm Friedemann Bach [Peters bk. 3002]. By Max Schneider. </item>
   <item n="3."> Bachiana. By Werner Wolffheim.</item>
   <item n="4."> Zur Geschichte der Passionsauff&uuml;hrungen in Leipzig. By Bernhard Fr. Richter.</item>
   <item n="5."> Tonartensymbolik zu Bachs Zeit. By Rudolf Wustmann.</item>
   <item n="6."> &Uuml;ber die Viola da Gamba und ihre Verwendung bei Joh. Seb. Bach. By Christian Dobereiner.</item>
   <item n="7."> Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach und Joh. Gottl. Im. Breitkopf. By Hermann von Hase.</item>
   <item n="8."> Zur <q>Lukaspassion.</q> By Max Schneider.</item>
   <item n="9."> Verzeichnis der Sammlung alter Musikinstrumente im Bachhaus zu Eisenach. By G. Bornemann.</item>
  </list>
<p>
The illustrations are, portraits of W. Friedemann Bach (aet. 72) and Johann Sebastian Bach (son of Carl P. E. Bach); facsimiles of Bach's arrangement of the D minor Vivaldi Organ Concerto (attributed to W. F. Bach) and <q>Lukaspassion,</q> and of a letter written to J. G. I. Breitkopf by C. P. E. Bach, dated 28th February 1786.
</p>
</item>

<item n="XII (3)."> 1912. Sechstes Deuteches Bach-Fest in Breslau 15 bis 17 Juni 1912. Fest- und Frogrammbuch.
<p>
Frontispiece, J. S. Bach after the oil-painting by G. Haussmann in possession of St. Thomas' School, Leipzig (see Spitta, vol. i. frontispiece and XVI (1) infra).
</p>
</item>

<item n="XIII (1)."> 1913. Ausgewahlte Arien mit obligaten Instrumenten und Klavierbegleitung. VII Abteilung: Arien fur Sopran. 3 Heft. Weltliche Arien. Ed. Eusebius Mrmdyczewski.
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Wenn die Fruhlingsl&uuml;fte streichen (<q>Weichet nur betr&uuml;bte Schatten</q>: Violin).</item>
  <item n="2."> Sich &uuml;ben im Lieben (<q>Weichet nur betr&uuml;bte Schatten</q>: Oboe).</item>
<pb n="280" />
  <item n="3."> Des Reichtums Glanz (<q>Ich bin in mir vergn&uuml;gt</q>:
Violin).<note place="foot">
<p>
The original words are <q>Die Sch&auml;tzbarkeit der weiten Erden.</q>
</p>
</note></item>
  <item n="4."> Meine Seele, sei vergn&uuml;gt (<q>Ich bin in mir vergn&uuml;gt</q>:
Flauto).</item>
  <item n="5."> Angenehmer Zephryus (<q>Der zufnedengestellte Aeolus</q>: Violin).</item>
  <item n="6."> Schweigt, ihr Fl&ouml;ten (<q>O holder Tag</q>: Flauto).</item>
  <item n="7."> Ei! wie schmeckt der Coffee s&uuml;sse (<q>Schweigt stille, plaudert nicht</q>: Flauto).</item>
  <item n="8."> Ruhig und in sich zufrieden (<q>Ich bin in mir vergn&uuml;gt</q>: 2 Oboi).</item>
  <item n="9."> Schafe k&ouml;nnen sicher weiden (<q>Was mir behagt</q>: 2 Flauti).</item>
  <item n="10."> Ruhet hie, matte T&ouml;ne (<q>O holder Tag</q>: Violin and Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="11."> Jagen ist die Lust der G&ouml;tter (<q>Was mir behagt</q>: 2 Horns).</item>
  <item n="12."> H&ouml;rt doch! der sanften Fl&ouml;ten Chor (<q>Schleicht, spielende Wellen</q>: 3 Flauti).</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XIII (2)."> 1913. Solo-Kantate f&uuml;r Sopran, <q>Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut,</q> ausgefunden und herausgegeben von C. A. Martiensen. Partitur.
</item>

<item n="XIII (3)."> 1913. Solo-Kantate f&uuml;r Sopran, <q>Mein Herze schwimmt im Blut.</q> Klavierauszug mit Text von Max Schneider.
</item>

<item n="XIII (4)."> 1913. Bach-Jahrbuch. 9 Jahrgang 1912: Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Schering. Mit 2 Noten-Anh&auml;ngen.
<p>
The volume contains the following articles:
</p>
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Uber die Motetten Seb. Bachs. By Bernhard Ft. Richter.</item>
  <item n="2."> Uber die F-dur Toccata [N. bk. 9 p. 176] von J. S. Bach. By Woldemar Voigt.</item>
<pb n="281" />

  <item n="3."> Die M&ouml;llersche Handschrift. Ein unbekanntes Gegenst&uuml;ck zum Andreas-Bach-Buche (mit einem Notenanhange). By Werner Wolffheim.</item>
  <item n="4."> Bachs Bearbeitungen und Umarbeitungen eigener und fremder Werke. By Karl Grunsky.</item>
  <item n="5."> &Uuml;ber die Kirchenkantaten vorbachischer Thomaskantoren (mit einem Notenanhange). By Arnold Sobering.</item>
  <item n="6."> Beitr&auml;ge zur Bachkritik. By Arnold Sobering.</item>
  <item n="7."> Auff&uuml;hrungen von Joh. Seb. Bachs Kompositionen. By Th. Biebrich.</item>
  <item n="8."> Notes.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XIV (1)."> 1914.<note place="foot">
<p>
The title-page is dated 1913 and the Preface <q>Im Advent auf 1914.</q>
</p>
</note> Joh. Seb. Bachs Kantatentexte. Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellsehaft herausgegeben von Rudolf Wustmann.
<p>
Contains the literary texts of the Church Cantatas, with critical notes.
</p>
</item>

<item>XIV (2). 1914. Bach-Jahrbuch. 10 Jahrgang 1913. Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellsehaft herausgegeben von Arnold Sobering. Mit einem Titelbilde und einer Beilage.
<p>
The volume contains the following articles:
</p>
 <list>
   <item n="1."> Studien zu J. S. Bachs Klavierkonzerten. By Adolf Aber.</item>
   <item n="2."> &Uuml;ber Joh. Seb. Bachs Konzerte fur drei Klaviere. By Hans Boas.</item>
   <item n="3."> Die Kantata Nr. 150, <q>Nach dir, Herr, verlanget mich.</q> By Arnold Sobering.</item>
   <item n="4."> &Uuml;ber die C-dur-Fuge aus dem I. Theil des <q>Wohltemperierten Klaviers.</q> By Wanda Landowska.</item>
   <item n="5."> Die Varianten der grossen G-moll-Fuge f&uuml;r Orgel
[Novello bk. 8 p. 127]. By Hermann Keller.</item>
   <item n="6."> Ein Bachkonzert in Kamenz. By Hermann Kretzschmar.</item>
<pb n="282" />
   <item n="7."> Breitkopfsche Textdrucke zu Leipziger Musikauff&uuml;hrungen zu Bachs Zeiten. By Hermann von Hase.</item>
   <item n="8."> J. S. Bachs Aria, <q>Erbauliche Gedanken ernes Tabakrauchers.</q> By Alfred Heuss.<note place="foot">
<p>
The Aria is no. 20 of A. M. Bach's <q>Notenbuch</q> for 1725. See E.G. XLII. (2) no. 20.
</p>
</note></item>
   <item n="9."> Johann Seb. Bachs und Christoph Graupners Kompositionen zur Bewerbung um das Thomaskantorat in Leipzig 1722-23. By Bernhard Fr. Richter.</item>
   <item n="10."> Register zu den ersten 10 Jahrgangen des Bach Jahrbuchs 1904-13. By Arnold Schering.</item>
 </list>
<p>
The frontispiece is a portrait of Bach, about thirty-five years old, after the original in the Eisenach Museum by Job. Jak. Ihle. See frontispiece of this volume.
</p>
</item>

<item n="XIV (3)."> 1914. Fest- und Programmbuch zum 7 Deutschen Bachfest der Neuen Bachgesellschaft. Wien. 9 bis 11 May 1914.
<p>
The frontispiece is a picture of St. Thomas' Church and School in 1723 (see p. 28 supra).
</p>
</item>

<item n="XV (1)."> 1914. Ausgew&auml;hlte Arien und Duette mit einem obligaten Instrument und Klavier- oder Orgelbegleitung. VIII Abteilung: Arien f&uuml;r Alt. 2 Heft. Ed. Eusebius Mandyczewski.
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Beth&ouml;rte Welt (Cantata 94: Flauto).</item>
  <item n="2."> Ein ungef&auml;rbt Gem&uuml;te (Cantata 24: Violin or Viola).</item>
  <item n="3."> Ermuntert euch (Cantata 176: Oboe).</item>
  <item n="4."> Gott ist unser Sonn' und Schild (Cantata 79: Oboe or Flauto).</item>
  <item n="5."> In Jesu Demuth (Cantata 151: Oboe d'amore or Violin).</item>
  <item n="6."> Jesus ist ein guter Hirt (Cantata 85: Violin or Violoncello).</item>
  <item n="7."> Kreuz und Krone (Cantata 12: Oboe).</item>
  <item n="8."> Sch&auml;me dich, O Seele, nicht (Cantata 147: Oboe d'amore).</item>
<pb n="283" />
  <item n="9."> Von der Welt verlang' ich nichts (Cantata 64: Oboe d'amore).</item>
  <item n="10."> Weh der Seele (Cantata 102 : Oboe).</item>
  <item n="11."> Willkommen! will ich sagen (Cantata 27: Cor Anglais).</item>
  <item n="12."> Zum reinen Wasser (Cantata 112: Oboe d'amore).</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XV (2)."> 1915. Bach-Jahrbuch. 11 Jahrgang 1914: Im Anftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Schering (Leipzig). Mit einem Titelbilde und einer Bilderbeilage.
<p>
The volume contains the following articles:
</p>
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Neues &uuml;ber das Bachbildnis der Thomasschule und andere Bildnisse Johann Sebastian Bachs. By Albrecht Kurzwelly.</item>
  <item n="2."> Zur Geschichte der Bachbewegung. Bericht &uuml;ber eine bisher unbekannte fr&uuml;he Auff&uuml;hrung der Mattha&uuml;uspassion. By Karl Anton.</item>
  <item n="3."> Johann Christoph Friedrich Bach. By Georg Sch&uuml;nemann.</item>
  <item n="4."> Die Wiederbelebung der Kurrende in Eisenach. By W. Nicolai.</item>
  <item n="5."> Auff&uuml;hrungen von Joh. Seb. Bachs Kompositionen in der Zeit vom Oktober 1912 bis Juli 1914. By Th. Biebrich.</item>
  <item n="6."> Bachauff&uuml;hrungen im ersten Jahre des deutschen Krieges. By Th. Biebrich.</item>
  <item n="7."> Mitgliederversammlung der Neuen Bachgesellschaft. Montag, den 11 Mai 1914.</item>
  <item n="8."> Reviews.</item>
 </list>
<p>
The frontispiece is a picture of Bach by Daniel Greiner.
</p>
</item>

<item n="XVI (1)."> 1916. Das Bachbildnis der Thomasschule zu Leipzig, nach seiner Wiederherstellung im Jahre 1913. Gemalt von E. G. Haussmanu 1746.
<p>
A print of the renovated picture is at p. 48 of this volume.
</p>
</item>
<pb n="284" />

<item n="XVI (2)."> 1916. Bach-Genealogie mit zwei Briefen von Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach. Herausgegeben von Professor Max Schneider in Breslau.<note place="foot">
<p>
This publication, announced for 1916, appears under a different title as the third issue for 1917. See infra, XVII. (3).
</p>
</note>
</item>

<item n="XVI (3)."> 1916. Bach-Jahrbuch. 12 Jahrgang 1915. Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Sobering (Leipzig). Mit dem Bildnisse J. S. Bachs nach der Gedenkb&uuml;ste in der Walhalla.
<p>
The volume contains the following articles:
</p>
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Johann Sebastian Bach im Gottesdienst der Thomaner. By Bernhard Friedrich Richter.</item>
  <item n="2."> Karl Philipp Emanuel Bach und der Dresdner Kreuz kantor Gottfried August Homilius im Musikleben ihrer Zeit. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Stilwandlung des 18 Jahrhunderts. By Rudolf Steglich.</item>
  <item n="3."> Eine Umdichtung des <q>Zufriedengestellten Aeolus</q> (Mit einem Anhang &uuml;ber die Kantata <q>Schleicht, spielende Wellen</q>). By Woldemar Voigt.</item>
  <item n="4."> Eine alte, unbekannte Skizze von Sebastian Bachs Leben. By Arthur Pr&uuml;fer.</item>
  <item n="5."> Bachauffuhrungen im zweiten Jahre des deutschen Krieges. By Th. Biebrich.</item>
  <item n="6."> Reviews.</item>
 </list>
<p>
The frontispiece is a photograph of Professor F. Behn's bust of Bach in the Walhalla.
</p>
</item>



<item n="XVII (1)."> 1916. Motette <q>O Jesu Christ, mein's Lebens Licht.</q> Nach Bachs Handschrift zum ersten Male herausgegeben von Max Schneider. Partitur, [See E.G. XXIV.]
</item>

<item n="XVII (2)."> 1916. Motette <q>O Jesu Christ, mein's Lebens Licht.</q> Klavierauszug mit Text von Max Schneider. [See B.G. XXIV.]
</item>

<pb n="285" />

<item n="XVII (3)."> 1917. Bach-Urkunden. Ursprung der musikalisch-Bachischen Familie. Nachrichten &uuml;ber Johann Sebastian Bach von Carl Philipp Emanuel Bach. Herausgegeben von Max Schneider.
<p>
The volume contains a facsimile of the Bach Genealogy compiled by Joh. Seb. Bach and formerly in Carl Philipp Emanuel's possession, and two letters from the latter to J. N. Forkel.
</p>
</item>

<item n="XVII (4)."> 1917. Bach-Jahrbuch. 13 Jahrgang 1916. Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Schering (Leipzig).
<p>
The volume contains the following articles:
</p>
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Die F.-Trompete im 2 Brandenburgischen Konzert von Joh. Seb. Bach. By Richard Hofmann.</item>
  <item n="2."> Zur Frage der Ausf&uuml;hrung der Ornamente bei Bach. Z&auml;hlzeit oder Notenwert? By Hans Joachim  Moser. </item>
  <item n="3."> Friedrich Bachs Briefwechsel mit Gerstenberg und Breitkopf. By Georg Schunemann.</item>
  <item n="4."> Bachauff&uuml;hrurgen im dritten Jahre des deutschen Krieges. By Th. Biebrich.</item>
  <item n="5."> Laterarische Beigabe: <q>Der Thomaskantor.</q> Ein Gem&uuml;th-erfreuend Spiel von deme Herren Cantori Sebastian Bachen, vorgestellt in zween Auffz&uuml;gen durch Bernhard Christoph Breitkopfen seel. Erben: Breitkopf und Hartel 1917. By Arnold Schering.</item>
 </list>
</item>

<item n="XVIII (1)."> 1917. Konzert in D moll nach der urspr&uuml;nglichen Fassung fur Violine wiederhergestellt von Robert Reitz. Partitur. [See B.G. XVII.]
</item>

<item n="XVIII (2)."> 1917. Konzert in D moll nach der urspr&uuml;nglichen Fassung f&uuml;r Violine wiederhergestellt von Robert Reitz. Ausgabe fur Violine und Klavier. [See B.G. XVII.]
</item>

<pb n="286" />

<item n="XVIII (3)."> 1918. Bach-Jahrbuch. 14 Jahrgang 1917: Im Auftrage der Neuen Bachgesellschaft herausgegeben von Arnold Schering (Leipzig). Mit einem Eildnis.
<p>
The volume contains the following articles :
</p>
 <list>
  <item n="1."> Gustav Schreck [d. 22 Jan. 1918].</item>
  <item n="2."> Das dritte kleine Bachfest zu Eisenach:
   <list>
    <item n="I."> Der Festgottesdienst in der St. Georgenkirche zu Eisenach am 30 September 1917.</item>
    <item n="II."> Vortrage und Verhandlungen der Mitgliederversammlung des dritten kleinen Bachfestes in Eisenach am 29 September 1917.</item>
    </list></item>
  <item n="3."> Seb. Bachs Stellung zur Choralrhythmik der Lutherzeit. By Hans Joachim Moser.</item>
  <item n="4."> Zur Motivbildung Bachs. Kin Beitrag zur Stilpsychologie. By Ernst Kurth.</item>
  <item n="5."> Ein Programmtrio Karl Philipp Emanuel Bachs. By Hans Mersmann.</item>
  <item n="6."> Hermann Kretzschmar [b. 19 Jan. 1848].</item>
  <item n="7."> Review.</item>
 </list>
<p>
The frontispiece is a copy of the oil portrait of Bach after Haussmann, copied by J. M. David in 1746.
</p>
</item>

</list>
</div>

</div>

<pb n="227" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>APPENDIX IV. BIBLIOGRAPHY OF BACH LITERATURE</head>
<p>
The following list does not include magazine articles or 
technical works.  A comprehensive bibliography, compiled by Max Schneider, will be found in the Bach-Jahrbuch for 1905 and 1910.  Shorter lists are in 
C. F. Abdy Williams' <title>Bach</title> (1900) and Andre Pirro's 
<title>J.-S. Bach</title> (1906).  Titles within square brackets in 
the following list are inserted upon the authority of the 
<title>Bach-Jahrbuch,</title> but are not discoverable in the annual 
Book Catalogues.  Since the absence of an Italian section 
may be remarked, it should be said that the <title>Catalogo 
generate della Libreria Italiana, 1847-1899</title> (published in 
1910) contains no reference to Bach.  Nor does the 
Supplement of 1912. 
</p>

<div>
<head type="sub">I. Germany</head>
<list>
<item>Johann Christoph W. K&uuml;hnau, <title>Die blinden Tonk&uuml;stler.</title> Berlin. 1810.</item>
<item>J. E. Grosser, <title>Lebensbeschreibung des Kapellmeisters Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> Breslau. 1834.</item>
<item>Albert Schiffner, <title>Sebastian Bachs geistige Nachkommenschaft.</title> Leipzig. 1840.</item>
<item>Johann T. Mosewius, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach in seinen 
Kirch-Kantaten und Choralges&auml;ngen.</title> Berlin. 1846.</item>
<item>Johann Carl Schauer, <title>Johann Sebastian Bachs Lebensbild: Eine Denkschrift auf seinen 100j&auml;hringen Todestag.</title> Jena. 1850.</item>
<item>C. L. Hilgenfeldt, <title>Johann Sebastian Bachs Leben, Wirken und Werke.</title> Leipzig. 1850.</item>
<item>[W. Naumann, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach. Eine Biographie.</title> Cassell. 1855.]</item>
<item>[Anon., <title>Biographien und Charakteristiken der grossen Meister: Bach, H&auml;ndel, Gluck, Haydn, Mozart, Beethoven, mit Portrats.</title> 2nd ed. Leipzig. 1860.]</item>
<item>C. H. Bitter, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> 2 vols. Berlin. 1865. 2nd ed. 1880.</item>
<item>C. Albert Ludwig, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach in seiner Bedeutung f&uuml;r Cantoren, Organisten, und Schullehrer.</title> Bleichroder. 1865.</item>
<item>Alfred D&ouml;rffel, <title>Thematisches Verzeichniss der Instrumentalwerke von Joh. Seb. Bach.</title> Auf Grund der Gesammtausgabe von C. P. Peters. Leipzig. 1867. 2nd ed. 1882.</item>
<item>Carl Tamme, <title>Thematisches Verzeichniss der Vocalwerke von Joh. Seb. Bach. Auf Grund der Gesammtausgaben von F. Peters und der Bach-Gesellschaft.</title> Leipzig, n.d.</item>
<item>C. H. Bitter, <title>C. P. E. und W. F. Bach und deren Br&uuml;der.</title> 2 vols. Berlin. 1868. New ed. 1880.</item>
<item>[Anon., <title>J. S. Bach. Biographie.</title> Leipzig. 1869.] </item>
<item>L. Ramann, <title>Bach und Handel.</title> Leipzig. 1869.</item>
<item>W. Junghans, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach als Schuler der Partikularschule zu St. Michaelis in L&uuml;neburg.</title> L&uuml;neburg. 1870.</item>
<item>Emil Naumann, <title>Deutsche Tondichter von Sebastian Bach bis auf die Gegenwart.</title> Berlin. 1871. 5th ed. 1882.</item>
<item>M. Schick, <title>J. S. Bach: ein musikalisches Lebensbild.</title> Reutlingen. 1873.</item>
<item>Philipp Spitta, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> 2 vols. Leipzig. 1873-1880.</item>
<item>E. Frommel, <title>H&auml;ndel und Bach.</title> Berlin. 1878.</item>
<item>Elise Polko, <title>Unsere Musikklassiker. Sechs biographische Lebensbilder</title> [Bach, etc.]. Leipzig. 1880.</item>
<item>[Anon., <title>J. S. Bach. Biographie.</title> [In <title>Meister der Tonkunst,</title> no. 2.] Leipzig. 1880.]</item>
<item>August Reissmann, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach. Sein Leben und seine Werke.</title> Berlin and Leipzig. 1881.</item>
<item>Otto Gumprecht, <title>Warum treiben wir Musik?</title> [Bach and others.] Leipzig. 1883.</item>
<item>C. H. Bitter, <title>Die S&ouml;hne Seb. Bachs.</title> Leipzig. 1883.</item>
<item>Jul. Sch&uuml;mann, <title>Joh. Seb. Bach, der Kantor der Thomas-schule zu Leipzig.</title> Leipzig. 1884.</item>
<item>A. L. Gr&auml;bner, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> Dresden. 1885.</item>
<item>Fr. Spitta, <title>Haendel und Bach. Zwei Festreden.</title> Bonn. 1884.</item>
<item>E. Heinrich, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach. Ein kurzes Lebensbild.</title> Berlin. 1885.</item>
<item>E. Naumann, <title>Deutsche Tondichter von J. S. Bach bis Richard Wagner.</title> Leipzig. 1886. 6th ed. 1896.</item>
<item>Paul Meyer, <title>Joh. Seb. Bach. Vortrag.</title> Basel. 1887.</item>
<item>Ludwig Ziemssen, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach. Lebensbild.</title> Glogau. 1889.</item>
<item>Richard Batka, <title>J. S. Bach.</title> Leipzig. 1893.</item>
<item>Wilhelm His, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach. Forschungen &uuml;ber dessen Grabst&auml;tte, Gebeine und Antlitz.</title> Leipzig. 1895.</item>
<item>Wilhelm His, <title>Anatomisches Forschungen &uuml;ber J. S. Bach's Gebeine und Antlitz, nebst Bemerkungen &uuml;ber dessen Bilder.</title> Leipzig. 1895.</item>
<item>Armin Stein, <title>J. S. Bach. Ein K&uuml;ntstlerleben.</title> Halle. 1896.</item>
<item>Hans von Wolzogen, <title>Bach</title> [In <title>Grossmeister deutscher Musik</title>]. Berlin. 1897.</item>
<item>[W. Kleefeld, <title>Bach und Graupner.</title> Leipzig. 1898.]</item>
<item>[Fr. Thomas, <title>Der Stammbaum des Ohrdruffer Zweigs der Familie von J. S. Bach.</title> Ohrdruf. 1899.]</item>
<item>[Fr. Thomas, <title>Einige Ergebnisse &uuml;ber J. S. Bachs Ohrdruffer Schulzeit.</title> Ohrdruf. 1900.]</item>
<item>B. Stein, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach und die Familie der <q>Bache.</q></title> Bielefeld. 1900.</item>
<item>Fr. von Hausegger, <title>Unsere deutschen Meister</title> [Bach and others]. Munich. 1901.</item>
<item>Arnold Sobering, <title>Bachs Textbehandlung.</title> Leipzig. 1901.</item>
<item>[W. Tappert, <title>Sebastian Bachs Kompositionen f&uuml;r die Laute.</title> Berlin. 1901.]</item>
<item>K. S&ouml;hle, <title>Sebastian Bach in Arnstadt</title> Berlin. 1902. 2nd ed. 1904.</item>
<item>Arthur Pr&uuml;fer, <title>Sebastian Bach und die Tonkunst des XIX. Jahrhunderts.</title> Leipzig. 1902.</item>
<item>H. Barth, <title>Joh. Sebastian Bach: Lebensbild.</title> Berlin. 1902.</item>
<item>Gustav H&ouml;cker, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> Gotha. 1903.</item>
<item>Paul von Bojanowski, <title>Das Weimar Johann Sebastian Bachs.</title> Weimar. 1903.</item>
<item>Jul. Schumann, <title>Bach, H&auml;ndel, Mendelssohn. Die protestantische Kirchenmusik in Lebensbildern.</title> Calw and Stuttgart. 1903.</item>
<item>[&mdash;. Weissgerber, <title>J. S. Bach in Arnstadt.</title> Arnstadt. 1904.] </item>
<item>[K. Storck, <title>J. S. Bach: Charakter und Lebensgang.</title> Berlin. 1905.]</item>
<item>[A. Pischinger, <title>J. S. Bach.</title> Munich. 1905.]</item>
<item>Philipp Wolfrum, <title>Joh. Seb. Bach.</title> Berlin. 1906.</item>
<item>Albert Schweitzer, <title>J. S. Bach.</title> Berlin. 1908.</item>
<item>Friedrich Hashagen, <title>Joh. Sebastian Bach als S&auml;nger und Musiker des Evangeliums.</title> Wismar. 1909.</item>
<item>Max Tr&uuml;mpelmann, <title>Joh. Sebastian Bach und seine Bedeutung f&uuml;r die Choralkomposition unserer Zeit.</title> Magdeburg. 1909.</item>
<item>August Wildenhahn, <title>Joh. Sebastian Bach.</title> Eisenach. 1909.</item>
<item>Philipp Wolfrum, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> 2 vols. Leipzig. 1910.</item>
<item>Andr&eacute; Pirro, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach. Sein Leben und seine Werke.</title> [Translated from the French by Bernhard Engelke.] Berlin. 1910.</item>
<item>Johannes Schreyer, <title>Beitr&auml;ge zur Bach-Kritik.</title> Leipzig. 1911.</item>
<item>Martin Falck, <title>Wilhelm Friedemann Bach. Sein Leben und seine Werke, mit thematischem Verzeichnis seiner Kompositionen und zwei Bildern.</title> Leipzig, c. 1911-14.</item>
<item>K. Glebe, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> Halle. 1912.</item>
<item>La Mara, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> 5th edition. Leipzig. 1912.</item>
<item>H. Reimann, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> 1912.</item>
<item>Armin Stein, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> Halle. 1912.</item>
<item>Rudolf Wustmann, <title>Joh. Seb. Bachs Kantatentexte.</title> Leipzig. 1914.</item>
<item>Max Bitter, <title>Der Stil Joh. Seb. Bachs in seinem Choralsatze.</title> Bremen. 1913.</item>
<item>Ernst Kurth, <title>Grundlagen des linearen Kontrapunkts.
Einf&uuml;hrung in Stil und Technik von Bachs melodischer Polyphonie.</title> Bern. 1917.</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">II. France</head>
<list>
<item>Johann Nikolaus Forkel, <title>Vie, talents et travaux de Jean S&eacute;bastien Bach.</title> [Translated from the German by Fel&iacute;x Grenier.] Paris. 1876.</item>
<item>Ernest David, <title>La vie et les &oelig;uvres de J.-S. Bach, sa famille, ses &eacute;l&egrave;ves, ses contemporains.</title> [An abridged translation of Spitta.] Paris. 1882.</item>
<item>William Cart, <title>Un maitre deux fois centenaire: &eacute;tude sur J.-S. Bach, 1685-1750.</title> Paris. 1884. New ed. 1898.</item>
<item>Andr&eacute; Pirro, <title>L'Orgue de Jean-S&eacute;bastien Bach.</title> Paris. 1895.</item>
<item>[G. Fink, <title>&Eacute;tude biographique sur Jean-S&eacute;bastien Bach.</title> Angoul&egrave;me. 1899.]</item>
<item>[&mdash;. Daubresse, <title>Haendel et Bach.</title> Paris. 1901.]</item>
<item>Albert Schweitzer, <title>J. S. Bach, le musicien-po&egrave;te.</title> Leipzig. 1905.</item>
<item>Andr&eacute; Pirro, <title>J.-S. Bach.</title> Paris. 1906. 4th edition. 1913.</item>
<item>Andr&eacute; Pirro, <title>L'Esth&eacute;tique de Jean-S&eacute;bastien Bach.</title> Paris. 1907.</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">III. Great Britain</head>
<list>
<item>Johann Nikolaus Forkel, <title>Life of John Sebastian Bach. Translated from the German</title> [by &mdash; Stephenson]. London. 1820.</item>
<item>C. H. Bitter, <title>The Life of J. Sebastian Bach. An abridged translation from the German.</title> [By Janet Elizabeth Kay Shuttleworth.] London. 1873.</item>
<item>R. Lane Poole, <title>Sebastian Bach.</title> London. 1881.</item>
<item>Sedley Taylor, <title>The Life of J. S. Bach in relation to his work as a Church musician and composer.</title> Cambridge. 1897.</item>
<item>Philipp Spitta, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach: His work and influence on the music of Germany, 1685-1750.</title> Translated from the German by Clara Bell and J. A. Fuller Maitland. 3 vols. London. 1899.</item>
<item>C. F. Abdy Williams, <title>Bach.</title> London. 1900.</item>
<item>A. Maczewski and F. G. Edwards, art. <title>Bach</title> in <title>Grove's  Dictionary,</title> vol. i. 1904.</item>
<item>E. H. Thome, <title>Bach.</title> London. 1904.</item>
<item>C. H. H. Parry, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> London and New York. 1909.</item>
<item>Donald F. Tovey, art. <title>J. S. Bach,</title> in <title>Encyclopaedia Britannica.</title> Vol. iii. 1910.</item>
<item>Albert Schweitzer, <title>J. S. Bach. With a Preface by C. M. Widor. English translation by Ernest Newman.</title> 2 vols. London. 1911.</item>
<item>C. Sanford Terry, <title>Bach's Chorals.</title> 3 vols. Cambridge. 1915, 1917, 1920.</item>
<item>W. G. Whittaker, <title>Fugitive Notes on certain Cantatas and Motets by J. S. Bach.</title> London. 1920.</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">IV. United States Of America</head>
<list>
<item>Andr&eacute; Pirro, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach, the Organist, and his works.</title> [Translated from the French by Wallace Goodrich.] New York. 1902.</item>
<item>Elbert Hubbard, <title>Little voyages to the homes of great musicians.</title> New York. 1902.</item>
<item>Ludwig Ziemssen, <title>Johann Sebastian Bach.</title> [Translated from the German by G. Putnam Upton.] Chicago. 1905.</item>
<item>Rutland Boughton, <title>Bach.</title> New York. 1907.</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">V. Holland</head>
<list>
<item>A. M. Oordt, <title>Een koort woord over Bach.</title> Leiden. 1873.</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">VI. Belgium</head>
<list>
<item>Charles Martens, <title>Un livre nouveau sur J.-S. Bach.</title> Brussels. 1905.</item>
<item>Victor Hallut, <title>Les Ma&icirc;tres classiques du dix-huiti&egrave;me siecle.</title> [Bach and others.] Brussels. 1909.</item>
</list>
</div>

<div>
<head type="sub">VII. Russia</head>
<list>
<item>[Kuschenaw Dmitrevsky, <title>Das lyrische Museum</title> (no. 25)]. [The oldest Russian biography of Bach.] Petrograd. 1831].</item>
<item>[W. Th. Odoewsky, <title>Sebastian Bach.</title> Petrograd. 1890.]</item>
<item>[G. M. Bazunow, <title>J. S. Bach.</title> Petrograd. 1894.]</item>
<item>[S. M. Haljutin, <title>J. S. Bach.</title> Minsk. 1894.]</item>
<item>[Adolf Chybinski, <title>J. S. Bach.</title> Warsaw. 1910.]</item>
</list>
</div>

</div>

<pb n="294" />
<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>APPENDIX V.  A COLLATION OF THE NOVELLO AND PETERS EDITIONS OF THE ORGAN WORKS</head>
<list>
<item>Novello: Book I. Eight Short Preludes And Fugues.
  <list>
    <item>Page 2. Prelude and Fugue in C major (P. bk. 247 p. 48).</item>
    <item>Page 5. Do. do. D minor (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> 51).</item>
    <item>Page 8. Do. do. E minor (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> 54).</item>
    <item>Page 11. Do. do. F major (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> 57).</item>
    <item>Page 14. Do. do. Q major (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> 60).</item>
    <item>Page 17. Do. do. G minor (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> 63).</item>
    <item>Page 20. Do. do. A minor (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> 66).</item>
    <item>Page 23. Do. do. B flat major (<foreign lang="la">ib.</foreign> 69).</item>
   </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book II. Preludes, Fugues, And Trio.
  <list>
    <item>Page 26. Allabreve in D major (P. bk. 247 p. 72).</item>
    <item>Page 30. Prelude in G major (ib. 82). </item>
    <item>Page 34. Canzona in D minor (P. bk. 243 p. 54).</item>
    <item>Page 38. Fugue (The Giant) in D minor (P. bk. 246 p. 78).</item> 
    <item>Page 41. Fugue in G minor (P. bk. 247 p. 85).</item>
    <item>Page 44. Prelude and Fugue (the Short) in E minor (P. bk. 242 p. 88).</item>
    <item>Page 48. Prelude and Fugue in C minor (P. bk. 243 p. 32).</item>
    <item>Page 54. Trio in D minor (ib. 72).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book III. Fantasias, Preludes, And Fugues.
  <list>
    <item>Page 57. Fantasia in C minor (5 parts) (P. bk. 243 p. 66).</item>
    <item>Page 60. Fugue in B minor (on a theme by Corelli) (ib. 46).</item>
    <item>Page 64. Prelude and Fugue in A major (P. bk. 241 p. 14)</item>
    <item>Page 70. Do. do. C major (ib. p. 2).</item>
<pb n="295" />
    <item>Page 76. Fantasia and Fugue in C minor (P. bk. 242 p. 55).</item>
    <item>Page 84. Fugue (the Short) in G minor (P. bk. 243 p. 42).</item>
  </list>
</item>


<item>Novello: Book IV. Sonatas Or Trios For Two Manuals And Pedal.
  <list>
    <item>Page 88. Sonata in E flat major (P. bk. 240 p. 2).</item>
    <item>Page 97. Do. C minor (ib. 11).</item>
    <item>Page 110. Do. D minor (ib. 24).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book V. Sonatas Or Trios For Two Manuals And Pedal (IV.-VI.).
  <list>
    <item>Page 124. Sonata in E minor (P. bk. 240 p. 36).</item>
    <item>Page 134. Do. C major (ib. 46).</item>
    <item>Page 151. Do. G major (ib. 63).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book VI. Toccata, Preludes, And Fugues.
  <list>
    <item>Page 2. Toccata and Fugue in D minor (P. bk. 243 p. 24).</item>
    <item>Page 10. Prelude and Fugue in D major (ib. p. 14).</item>
    <item>Page 21. Do. do. F minor (P. bk. 241 p. 29).</item>
    <item>Page 28. Do. do. E flat major (P. bk. 242 p. 2).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book VII. Preludes And Fugues.
  <list>
    <item>Page 42. Prelude and Fugue (the Great) in A minor (P. bk. 241 p. 54).</item>
    <item>Page 52. Do. do. B minor (ib. 78).</item>
    <item>Page 64. Do. do. C minor (ib. 36).</item>
    <item>Page 74. Prelude and Fugue in C major (P. bk. 243 p. 2).</item>
    <item>Page 80. Do. do. G major (ib. 8).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book VIII. Preludes And Fugues.
  <list>
    <item>Page 88. Prelude and Fugue in C major (P. bk. 242 p. 62). </item>
    <item>Page 98. Do. (the Great) in E minor (P. bk. 241 p. 64).</item>
    <item>Page 112. Do. do. G major (ib p. 7).</item>
    <item>Page 120. Do. in G minor (P. bk. 242 p. 48).</item>
    <item>Page 127. Fantasia and Fugue (the Great) in G minor (P. bk. 241 p. 20).</item>
  </list>
</item>
<pb n="296" />

<item>Novello: Book IX. Preludes And Fugues. 
  <list>
    <item>Page 137. Toccata and Fugue (the Great) in C major (P. bk. 242 p. 72).</item>
    <item>Page 150. Prelude and Fugue in D minor (ib. 42). </item>
    <item>Page 156. Do. (the Great) in C major (P. bk. 241 p. 46).</item>
    <item>Page 168. Fantasia in G major (P. bk. 243 p. 58). </item>
    <item>Page 176. Toccata and Fugue (the Great) in F major (P. bk. 242 p. 16).</item> 
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book X. Toccata, Preludes, And Fugues. 
  <list>
    <item>Page Page 196. Toccata and Fugue (the Dorian) in D minor (P. bk. 242 p. 30.)</item>
    <item>Page 208. Prelude and Fugue (the Short) in A minor (ib. 84). </item>
    <item>Page 214. Passacaglia in C minor (P. bk. 240 p. 75). </item>
    <item>Page 230. Fugue in C minor (P. bk. 243 p. 36). </item>
    <item>Page 238. Prelude in A minor (ib. 68). </item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book XI. Four Concertos [after Antonio Vivaldi].
  <list>
    <item>Page 1. Concerto in G major (P. bk. 247 p. 2). </item>
    <item>Page 10. Do. A minor (ib. 10).</item>
    <item>Page 24. Do. C major (ib. 22).</item>
    <item>Page 49. Do. C major (ib. 44).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book XII. Preludes, Fantasias, Fugues, Trios, Etc.
  <list>
    <item>Page 55. Fugue in G major (P. bk. 2067 p. 18).</item>
    <item>Page 60. Fantasia and Fugue in A minor (ib. 3).</item>
    <item>Page 71. Fantasia with Imitation in B minor (P. bk. 215 p. 41).</item>
    <item>Page 75. Fantasia in G major (P. bk. 2067 p. 25). </item>
    <item>Page 83. Fugue in D major (P. bk. 2067 p. 22). </item>
    <item>Page 86. Do. G major (ib. 12). </item>
    <item>Page 91. Prelude in C major (P. bk. 247 p. 77).</item>
    <item>Page 92. Fantasia in C major (ib. 78).</item>
    <item>Page 94. Prelude in C major (ib. 76).</item>
    <item>Page 95. Fugue in C minor (P. bk. 243 p. 50).</item>
<pb n="297" />
    <item>Page 100. Fugue in C major (P. bk. 247 p. 80). </item>
    <item>Page 102. Pastorale in F major (P. bk. 240 p. 86). </item>
    <item>Page 108. Trio in C minor (P. bk. 2067 p. 30). </item>
    <item>Page 112. Aria in F major (ib. 34). </item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>
[Novello's Books XIII. and XIV. (Choral Preludes and 
Variations) are superseded by Books XV.-XIX.] 
</item>


<item>Novello: Book XV. Orgelb&uuml;chlein (little Organ Book).
  <list>
    <item>Page 3. Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland (P. bk. 244 p. 44). </item>
    <item>Page 5. Gott durch deine G&uuml;te, or, Gottes Sohn ist Kommen (ib. 20).</item>
    <item>Page 9. Herr Christ, der ein'ge Gottes-Sohn, or, Herr Gott, nun sei gepreiset (ib. 24).</item>
    <item>Page 11. Lob sei dem allm&auml;chtigen Gott (ib. 40).</item>
    <item>Page 13. Puer natus in Bethlehem (ib. 50).</item>
    <item>Page 15. Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ (ib. 19).</item>
    <item>Page 18. Der Tag, der ist so freudenreich (ib. 13).</item>
    <item>Page 21. Vom Himmel hoch, da komm ich her (ib. 53).</item>
    <item>Page 23. Vom Himmel kam der Engel Schaar (ib. 54).</item>
    <item>Page 26. In dulci jubilo (ib. 38).</item>
    <item>Page 29. Lobt Gott, ihr Christen, allzugleich (ib. 42).</item>
    <item>Page 31. Jesu, meine Freude (ib. 34).</item>
    <item>Page 33. Christum wir sollen loben schon (ib. 8).</item>
    <item>Page 36. Wir Christenleut' (ib. 58).</item>
    <item>Page 39. Helft mir Gottes G&uuml;te preisen (ib. 23).</item>
    <item>Page 43. Das alte Jahr vergangen ist (ib. 12).</item>
    <item>Page 45. In dir ist Freude (ib. 36).</item>
    <item>Page 50. Mit Fried' und Freud' ich fahr' dahin (ib. 42).</item>
    <item>Page 53. Herr Gott, nun schleuss den Himmel auf (ib. 26).</item>
    <item>Page 58. O Lamm Gottes unschuldig (ib. 46).</item>
    <item>Page 61. Christe, du Lamm Gottes (ib. 3).</item>
    <item>Page 64. Christus, der uns selig macht (ib. 10).</item>
    <item>Page 67. Da Jesus an dem Kreuze stund (ib. 11).</item>
    <item>Page 69. O Mensch, bewein' dein' S&uuml;nde gross (ib. 48).</item>
    <item>Page 73. Wir danken dir, Herr Jesu Christ (ib. 59).</item>
    <item>Page 76. Hilf Gott, dass mir's gelinge (ib. 32).</item>
    <item>Page 79. Christ lag in Todesbanden (ib. 7). 81. Jesus Christus, unser Heiland (ib. 34).</item>
    <item>Page 83. Christ ist eratanden (ib. 4).</item>
<pb n="298" />
    <item>Page 89. Erstanden ist der heil'ge Christ (P. bk. 244 p. 16).</item>
    <item>Page 91. Erschienen ist der herrliche Tag (ib. 17).</item>
    <item>Page 94. Heut' triumphiret Gottes Sohn (ib. 30).</item>
    <item>Page 97. Komm, Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer, heiliger Geist (P. bk. 246 p. 86).</item>
    <item>Page 99. Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend' (P. bk. 244 p. 28).</item>
    <item>Page 101. Liebster Jesu, wir sind hier (ib. 40). </item>
    <item>Page 103. Dies sind die heil'gen zehn Gebot' (ib. 14). </item>
    <item>Page 105. Vater unser im Himmelreich (ib. 52). </item>
    <item>Page 107. Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt (ib. 15). </item>
    <item>Page 109. Es ist das Heil uns kommen her (ib. 18). </item>
    <item>Page 111. Ich ruf' zu dir, Herr Jesu Christ (ib. 33). </item>
    <item>Page 113. In dich hab' ich gehoffet, Herr (ib. 35).</item> 
    <item>Page 115. Wenn wir in h&ouml;chsten Nothen sein (ib. 55). </item>
    <item>Page 117. Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten (ib. 57). </item>
    <item>Page 119. Alle Menschen m&uuml;ssen sterben (ib. 2).</item> 
    <item>Page 121. Ach wie nichtig, ach wie fl&uuml;chtig (ib. 2). </item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book XVI. The Six <q>Sch&uuml;bler Chorale 
Preludes</q> And The <q>Clavier&uuml;bung,</q> Part III. 
  <list>
    <item>(a) The Sch&uuml;bler Preludes.
    <list>
      <item>Page 1. Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme (P. bk. 246p. 72).</item>
      <item>Page 4. Wo soll ich fliehen hin, or, Auf meinen lieben Gott (ib. 84).</item>
      <item>Page 6. Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten (ib. 76).</item>
      <item>Page 8. Meine Seele erhebt den Herren (Hi. 33).</item>
      <item>Page 10. Ach bleib bei uns, Herr Jesu Christ (P. bk. 245 p. 4).</item>
      <item>Page 14. Kommst du nun, Jesu, vom Himmel herunter (P. bk. 246 p. 16).<lb/>(b) The <q>Clavier&uuml;bung,</q> Part III. </item> 
      <item>Page 19. Prelude in E flat major (P. bk. 242 p. 2).</item>
      <item>Page 28. Kyrie, Gott Vater in Ewigkeit (P. 246 p. 18).</item>
      <item>Page 30. Christe, aller Welt Trost (ib. 20).</item>
      <item>Page 33. Kyrie, Gott heiliger Geist (ib. 23).</item>
      <item>Page 36. Kyrie, Gott Vater in Ewigkeit (ib. 26).</item>
      <item>Page 37. Christe, aller Welt Trost (ib. 27).</item>
<pb n="299" />
      <item>Page 38. Kyrie, Gott heiliger Geist (P. 246 p. 28).</item>
      <item>Page 39. Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr' (Pk. b. 245 p. 10).</item>
      <item>Page 40. Do. do. do (ib. 12).</item>
      <item>Page 41. Do. do. do. (ib. 29).</item>
      <item>Page 42. Dies sind die heil'gen zehn Gebot' (ib. 50).</item>
      <item>Page 47. Do. do. do (ib. 54).</item>
      <item>Page 49. Wir glauben all' an einen Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer (P. bk. 246 p. 78).</item>
      <item>Page 52. Do. do. do. (ib. 81).</item>
      <item>Page 53. Vater unser im Himmelreich (ib. 60).</item>
      <item>Page 61. Do. do. (P. bk. 244 p. 51).</item>
      <item>Page 62. Christ, unser Herr, zum Jordan kam (P. bk. 245 p. 46).</item>
      <item>Page 67. Do. do. do. (ib. 49).</item>
      <item>Page 68. Aus tiefer Noth schrei' ich zu dir (ib. 36).</item>
      <item>Page 72. Do. do. do. (ib. 38).</item>
      <item>Page 74. Jesus Christus unser Heiland (ib. 82).</item>
      <item>Page 80. Do. do. (ib. 92).</item>
      <item>Page 83. Fugue in E flat major (P. bk. 242 p. 10).</item>
  </list>
  </item>
</list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book XVII. The Eighteen Chorale Preludes.
  <list>
    <item>Page 1. Komm, heiliger Geist, Herre Gott (P. bk. 246 p.4).</item>
    <item>Page 10. Do. do. do. (ib. 10).</item>
    <item>Page 18. An Wasserfl&uuml;ssen Babylon (P. bk. 245 p. 34).</item> 
    <item>Page 22. Schm&uuml;cke dich, O liebe Seele (P. bk. 246 p. 50). </item>
    <item>Page 26. Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend' (P. bk. 245 p. 70).</item>
    <item>Page 32. O Lamm Gottes unschuldig (P. bk. 246 p. 45). </item>
    <item>Page 40. Nun danket alle Gott (ib. 34). </item>
    <item>Page 43. Von Gott will ich nicht lassen (ib. 70). </item>
    <item>Page 46. Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland (ib. 38). </item>
    <item>Page 49. Do. do. do. (ib. 40). </item>
    <item>Page 52. Do. do. do. (ib. 42).</item>
    <item>Page 56. Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr' (P. bk. 245 p. 26).</item>
    <item>Page 60. Do. do. do (ib. 22).</item>
    <item>Page 66. Do. do. do. (ib. 17).</item>
    <item>Page 74. Jesus Christus, unser Heiland, der von uns (ib. 87).</item>
    <item>Page 79. Do. do. do. (ib. 90).</item>
<pb n="300" />
    <item>Page 82. Komm, Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer, heiliger Geist (P. bk. 246 p. 2).</item>
    <item>Page 85. Wenn wir in h&ouml;chsten N&ouml;then sein, or, Vor deinen Thron tret' ich allhier (ib. 74).</item>
  </list>
 </item>

<item>Novello: Book XVIII. Miscellaneous Chorale Preludes (Part I.).
  <list>
    <item>Page 1. Ach Gott und Herr (P. bk. 2067 p. 38). </item>
    <item>Page 2. Do. do. (P. bk. 245 p. 3).</item>
    <item>Page 3. Do. do. (P. bk. 2067 p. 39).</item>
    <item>Page 4. Allein Gott in der H&ouml;h' sei Ehr' (not in P.).</item>
    <item>Page 5. Do. do. do. (P. bk. 245 p. 6)</item>
    <item>Page 7. Do. do. do. (ib. 30).</item>
    <item>Page 11. Do. do. do. (ib. 8).</item>
    <item>Page 13. An Wasserfl&uuml;ssen Babylon (ib. 32). </item>
    <item>Page 16. Christ lag in Todesbanden (ib. 43). </item>
    <item>Page 19. Do. do. (ib. 40). </item>
    <item>Page 23. Christum wir sollen loben schon, or, Was f&uuml;rcht'st du, Feind Herodes, sehr (P. bk. 244 p. 9).</item>
    <item>Page 24. Das Jesulein soll doch mein Trost (P. bk. 2067 p. 47).</item>
    <item>Page 26. Der Tag der ist so freudenreich (not in P.). </item>
    <item>Page 28. Durch Adams Fall ist ganz verderbt (P. bk. 245 p. 66).</item>
    <item>Page 30. Ein' feste Burg ist unser Gott (ib. 68). </item>
    <item>Page 35. Erbarm' dich mein, O Herre Gott (not in P.). </item>
    <item>Page 37. Gelobet seist du, Jesu Christ (P. bk. 244 p. 102).</item>
    <item>Page 38. Do. do. do. (ib. 20).</item>
    <item>Page 39. Do. do. do. (P. bk. 245 p. 61).</item>
    <item>Page 41. Gottes Sohn ist kommen (P. bk. 244 p. 22).</item>
    <item>Page 42. Do. do. (P. bk. 245 p. 64).</item>
    <item>Page 43. Herr Christ, der ein'ge Gottes-Sohn (P. bk. 244 p. 25).</item>
    <item>Page 44. Herr Gott, dich loben wir (Te Deum Laudamus) (P. bk. 245 p. 65).</item>
    <item>Page 60. Herr Jesu Christ, dich zu uns wend' (P. bk. 244 p. 28).</item>
    <item>Page 52. Do. do. do. (not in P.).</item>
    <item>Page 53. Herzlich thut mich verlangen (P. bk. 244 p. 30).</item>
<pb n="301" />
    <item>Page 54. Ich hab' mein' Sach Gott heimgestellt (P. bk. 245 p. 74).</item>
    <item>Page 58. Do. do. do. (not in P.).</item>
    <item>Page 59. In dich hab' ich gehoffet, Herr (P. bk. 245 p. 94).</item>
    <item>Page 61. In dulci jubilo (P. bk. 244 p. 103).</item>
    <item>Page 64. Jesu, meine Freude (P. bk. 245 p. 78).</item>
    <item>Page 69. Jesus, meine Zuversicht (P. bk. 244 p. 103).</item>
    <item>Page 70. Liebster Jesu, wir sind hier (ib. 105).</item>
    <item>Page 71. Do. do. (ib. 105).</item>
    <item>Page 72. Do. do. (ib. 39).</item>
    <item>Page 73. Lob sei dem allm&auml;chtigen Gott (ib. 41).</item>
    <item>Page 74. Lobt Gott, ihr Christen, allzugleich (ib. 106).</item>
    <item>Page 75. Meine Seele erhebt den Herren (Magnificat) (P. bk. 246 p. 29).</item>
    <item>Page 80. Nun freut euch, lieben Christen g'mein, or, Es ist gewisslich an der Zeit (ib. 36). </item>
    <item>Page 83. Nun komm, der Heiden Heiland (P. bk. 244 p. 45).</item>
  </list>
</item>

<item>Novello: Book XIX. Miscellaneous Chorale Preludes (part II.) And Variations.
  <p>(a) Preludes.</p>
    <list>
    <item>Page 2. Valet will ich dir geben (P. bk. 246 p. 53). </item>
    <item>Page 7. Do. do. (ib. 56). </item>
    <item>Page 12. Vater unser im Himmelreich (ib. 66). </item>
    <item>Page 14. Vom Himmel hoch, da komm ich her (ib. 67). </item>
    <item>Page 16. Do. do. do. (ib 68). </item>
    <item>Page 19. Do. do. do. (P. bk. 244 p. 106).</item>
    <item>Page 21. Wer nur den lieben Gott l&auml;sst walten (ib. 56).</item>
    <item>Page 22. Do. do. do. (ib. 56).</item>
    <item>Page 23. Wie sch&ouml;n leuchtet der Morgenstern (not in P.).</item>
    <item>Page 28. Wir Christenleut' (P. bk. 2067 p. 52).</item>
    <item>Page 30. Wir glauben all' an einen Gott, Vater (P. bk. 246 p. 82). </item>
    <item>Page 32. Wo soll ich fliehen hin (P. bk. 2067 p. 48). (6) Variations. </item>
    <item>Page 36. Christ, der du bist der helle Tag (P. bk. 244 p. 60). </item>
<pb n="302" />
    <item>Page 44. O Gott, du frommer Gott (P. bk. 244 p. 68).</item>
    <item>Page 55. Sei gegr&uuml;sset, Jesu g&uuml;tig (ib. 76).</item>
    <item>Page 73. Vom Himmel hoch, da komm ich her (ib. 92).</item>
    </list>
  </item>
</list>
<p>The Peters volumes 244, 245, 246, 2067 contain movements excluded from the Novello edition, <foreign lang="la">viz.</foreign>:&mdash;
</p>
  <list>
    <item>Book 244: the figured Choral (Herr Christ, der ein'ge Gottes-Sohn) on p. 107, and the Variant texts on pp. 108-112.</item>
    <item>Book 245: the Variant texts on pp. 96-113.</item>
    <item>Book 246: the Variant texts on pp. 86-103 (excepting the B version of <q>Komm, Gott, Sch&ouml;pfer, heiliger Geist</q>).</item>
    <item>Book 2067: the Choral Preludes on pp. 39 (Auf meinen lichen Gott), 40 (Wir glauben all' an einen Gott), 42 (Jesu Leiden, Pein und Tod), 44 (Ach Gott, vom Himmel sieh darein), 54 (Aus der Tiefe ruf ich), 56 (Christ lag in Todesbanden), and the <q>Kleines harmonisches Labyrinth</q> on p. 16.</item>
  </list>

</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
  <index index="toc" />
  <index index="pdf" />
<head>APPENDIX VI. GENEALOGY OF THE FAMILY OF BACH</head>
<p>
</p>

<figure url="images/gene303.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Genealogy Table, p. 303</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/gene304.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w80">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Genealogy Table, p. 304</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/gene305.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Genealogy Table, p. 305</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/gene306.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Genealogy Table, p. 306</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/gene307.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Genealogy Table, p. 307</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/gene308.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Genealogy Table, p. 308</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/gene309.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Genealogy Table, p. 309</figDesc>
</figure>

<figure url="images/gene310.jpg" rend="page-float:'h'; w90">
<index index="fig" />
<figDesc>Genealogy Table, p. 310</figDesc>
</figure>

</div>

<div id="footnotes">
<index index="toc" />
<index index="pdf" />
<head>Footnotes</head>
<divGen type="footnotes"/>
</div>

<div rend="page-break-before: right">
<divGen type="pgfooter" />
</div>
</back>

</text>
</TEI.2>

